From his false dawn of hope Jacob sank presently into lethargy and
reaction.  He recalled William Marydrew's speeches for comfort, but
found that more than comfort was in them.  With night and silence he
lay awake reflecting on his wife.  Everything depended upon her, not
upon him.  Could her merciful spirit, even under this awful
provocation, become permanently ruthless?  He was already fighting
fiercely for the rags of his future, in hope to find decent covering
among them.  The court, the jury, the adverse verdict, the minatory
judge were sunk into shadowlands, that mattered less than a bad dream.




CHAPTER III

UTILITY

A longing to annihilate time--to crush it, absorb it, put it behind
him--dominated Jacob from the hour of his return.  He had been for
three days from home and found that nothing specially demanded his
attention, save letters which Peter could not write.  All went
smoothly with his business and he was free to concentrate on the
greater matter of his life.  He told himself that propitiation would
be demanded by many.  His wife came first, but he felt that uncertain
periods of time must be suffered before he could dare to approach
her.  With Adam Winter, however, his own feverish desire to begin his
task assured Jacob that there need be no delay.  To put himself right
with this wronged man was the thing nearest to his hand, and two days
after returning home, he sought out Adam at Shipley.

It chanced that, as he approached the farm, Samuel emerged from a
barn.  Seeing Bullstone, he grew very red, his jaw worked, and he
mopped and mowed like a monkey, but did not speak.  The visitor saw
hate in his face and rage uncontrolled by reason.  Sammy spat on the
ground and glowered and watched his enemy pass to the door.  Then,
having knocked, Jacob looked around, with an instinct to keep his eye
on the weak-minded man.  But Adam's brother had already departed.

Amelia Winter answered his call and her face seemed to grow smaller
when she looked upon him.  She shrank back and her bosom rose and she
became pale.  She waited for him to speak.

"Good morning, Miss Winter," he said.  "I'm very wishful to see your
nephew if you will tell me where I am likely to find him."

She did not answer, but left Jacob and went into the house-place.
There he heard the murmur of voices, and then Adam came down the
stone-paved passage.  He was in his working clothes.

"I should think it a great favour if you would let me speak to you
for a few minutes," said Bullstone.  "I've no right to come before
you, but none the less venture to do it."

Adam looked at him without animation or emotion.  Only a weary
indifference marked his face and echoed in his voice.  He was not
thinking of Jacob, but his aunt.  Amelia had told him that Bullstone
would quickly come to grovel.  He had much doubted this, but made up
his mind to listen if Jacob did seek him.

"If you'll step in here," he said, and opened a door on the left of
the entrance.

Jacob went in before him, took off his hat and sat down on a chair by
the empty hearth.  It was the parlour of Shipley and seldom used.
Adam Winter, with his hands in his pockets, walked to the window and
stood looking out of it.

"Words are poor things before this business," began Bullstone, "and I
won't keep you, or waste your time with many.  I've wasted enough of
your time, and if you could tell me what that waste stood for in
figures, I'd be thankful to make it up to you.  I'm only here now to
express my abiding sorrow and grief at what I've done, and
acknowledge how basely I have wronged you.  You know I've wronged
you, of course--so does the rest of the world; but you didn't yet
know that I know it.  I want you to understand that I accept the
judgment and all that was said against me, because I deserved every
word of it.  I've done terrible evil, and the fag end of my life I
shall spend in trying to make amends, so far as it lies in my power.
After my poor wife, you are the one who has got most cause to hate me
and most cause to demand from me the utmost atonement I can make.
But first I ask you, as a good Christian, called to suffer untold
trouble through no fault of your own, to pardon those who have
trespassed against you.  I beg you to forgive me, Adam Winter, and
tell me that you can.  That's all for the minute."

Winter listened and nodded his head once or twice.  He was listless
and melancholy.  When he spoke he might have been the worsted man,
for his voice had none of the ring and conviction of the other's.

"I forgive you, Jacob Bullstone.  That's easy enough.  And since you
are here, I'll speak too, because some inner things didn't come out
at the trial.  I want you to know that I never heard tell you were a
jealous man.  Your wife, no doubt, had cause to know it; but if she
ever mentioned the fact to anybody, which is little likely, it wasn't
to me.  Decent partners hide each other's faults because it's seemly
they should, and Mrs. Bullstone wasn't more likely to hint at a soft
spot in you than, I suppose, you would have been to whisper any
weakness you might have found in her.  So I knew nothing, and I came
into this horror as innocent as my sheep-dog; and if I'd dreamed how
it was, I'd have left Shipley years and years ago, at any cost to
myself and my family."

"I believe it," answered Jacob.  "I understand the manner of man you
are now, and the false light that's blinded me these many years is
out.  And if I could take your sufferings off your shoulders and
endure them for you, thankfully I'd do it.  I want to be the only one
to suffer now--the only one to carry this burden."

"Yes, yes--no doubt.  The past is past, and if the past didn't always
flow, like a river, into the present and future, life would be as
easy for us as for the beasts, that only know the present.  Good-bye.
God help you and all of us."

He indicated that the interview was done; but Jacob did not move.  He
only blundered on, uttering promises and hopes for the future which,
to Adam Winter, sounded inconceivably vain.

"And that," said Jacob at last, "brings me to my wife."

"Please don't talk about her to me," interrupted the other.  "Can't
you see----?"

"I see nothing," answered Bullstone.  "But I feel--I feel everything.
The past is past, as you say, and past praying for; but there's the
future.  I thought perhaps you might--I can't go before her--not for
many, many days.  But you----"

"Me!  Good God, man, what are you made of?  Me!  Don't you
understand?  But try--try to understand.  Try to understand that
other men can feel as much as you do and suffer as much.  What you've
done don't end with yourself and your troubles; what you've done
never will end at all in some directions.  It's altered the very
stuff of life for a score of people.  Poison be poison, and we have
each got to fight it in our own way.  I shall never speak to Mrs.
Bullstone again as long as I live--nor she to me.  That goes without
speech surely?  Haven't you seen even so far?  Do you suppose
nobody's got to go on living and smarting but you?"

It was Winter who had now grown animated and shown a flash of emotion
at Jacob's self-absorbed attitude; while Bullstone sank into greater
restraint before this larger vision.

"Thank you," he said, rising.  "You put me right.  My head's in a
whirl.  I only felt a great longing come over me.  But I dare say
it's all too late.  I won't trouble you no more.  Time will show what
I feel to you."

"Hold in then," advised the other, his passing fire dead.  "Hold in
and give time a chance.  You can't do time's work, but you may easily
undo it.  And if time can't serve you, I don't see what can, always
excepting your Maker.  But lie low--don't go thrusting forward, just
because you've got a longing to get right with people.  No doubt you
have; but things--there--who am I to preach to you?  Leave it, leave
it and be gone."

They parted and Jacob, walking on the Brent road to wait for Auna,
who had gone that day to the post-office, pondered the new standpoint
set before him.  He perceived that he had been shameless, and once
more stood under correction from the man he had wronged.  Adam Winter
was right.  He must 'hold in.'  The storm had yet to burst--the storm
of public opinion.  He knew not where it might drive him.  He had
been so eager to start upon the great business of building again that
he overlooked the extent of the ruins.  His spirit fainted for a
little while; and then he turned to think upon Margery and consider
her present attitude.  Did she recognise the possibility of any
reparation?  He did not know, yet believed that she presently might.
But clearly it was not in his power to anticipate time.  He must be
patient and endure and see days, weeks, months drag interminably.

He perceived how the disaster had stricken and changed Winter--how
deeply it had tinctured his thought and bred bitterness in a man
hitherto devoid of bitterness.  Winter was right to be impatient with
him.  He had greatly erred to approach Winter so soon.  He saw that
restraint was called for, and restraint had always been easy to him
until now.  He, too, was changed, and no doubt everybody who had
endured this violence was also changed, if only for a season.  Winter
had said that things must always be different for ever.  That meant
that his evil action would actually leave an impress on character--on
many characters.

He wished greatly that his wife were alone, to pursue the future in
temporary isolation.  Then, with the children to go and come....  But
she was not alone and therein he began to see his greatest danger.
She would never be alone, and the influences under which she dwelt
would be directed against her own nature and qualities, for she was
not strong enough, physically or mentally, to oppose her mother.  She
never had been, even when, as sometimes happened, the will existed to
oppose her.

Jacob met Auna speeding homeward and she had not changed.  Her
caresses and smiles greatly heartened him; but she was timid and
clearly under influence.  He waited for her to speak of her mother,
but she did not.

"I hope mother is pretty well again, Auna?" he asked as they neared
home, but Auna shook her head resolutely.

"Grandmother made me promise not to speak of mother.  She said you
wouldn't wish it; and I did promise, father."

"Then you must keep your promise," he answered.  "I've done terrible
things, Auna, but I'm punished for doing them, and I'm very sorry for
doing them, and I hope in time everybody will forgive me."

"I forgive you," she said, "and I never, never will go away from you,
so long as you want me."

She held his hand tightly and he guessed that the future had been
considered.

"Home is home," he told her, and something in the phrase, striking
upon thoughts which were hidden from her father, but belonged to her
recent experiences, made the child begin to cry.  He guessed that she
knew of decisions as yet concealed from him, and that she cried
rather for him than herself.

"Cheer up," he said.  "There's all the future to try and put things
right in, Auna.  And you to help me--such a helpful treasure is to me
always."

"Grandmother," she sobbed, and Jacob began to comprehend.  He was
still untutored and in no mood for delay.  He devoted a great part of
that night to writing to Mrs. Huxam, and next day sent a long letter
to her by Avis.  It was a letter into which he poured the full flood
of his contrition.  He confessed his error and the horrible
ingredient of character that had vitiated life for him and Margery.
He declared himself healed and purified, and implored that his wife's
parents, from their Christian standpoint, would be merciful to the
weak and not bar the door to a reconciliation in the future.  He
humiliated himself and felt no restraining pride to control his
abasement.  Finally he invited the Huxams to define the situation,
that he might know if the time to come held any hope, and he
explained that he left himself entirely in his wife's hands.
Anything that she might direct and desire he would perform; he
suggested leaving Red House for a time and absenting himself
indefinitely should Margery wish to return home.  He explained that
the empty house at Huntingdon Warren was now rented by him, and that
he would be very willing to go there at once and remain there for
some months if the proposition commended itself to them.  Thus he
sought to be even with time by allowing Margery to plan it.  He erred
every way, but did no harm, because Avis brought his letter back
unopened in the evening.

"Grandmother says I'm to tell you she don't want any letters from
you, father," she said.

He took his bulky packet.

"And is that all she said?" he asked.

"That's all."

"Did you see your mother, Avis?"

"Yes, I did.  She's not well, and I'm not to say anything about her."

"This letter was as much for your grandfather as your grandmother,"
explained Jacob; "and if she won't read it, then he must."

"He won't read it if she tells him not to," answered Avis.  "He's
against you, same as everybody else is against you, father."

Jacob did not argue upon the subject, but after two days of silence,
during which no communication or message reached him, he went into
Brent and entered the post-office.

Barlow Huxam was behind the counter and he grew red and puffed his
cheeks when he saw Jacob.

"This is very inconvenient," he said, "I wish you wouldn't come here.
Nothing can be gained--nothing whatever."

"I didn't want to come; but I wrote to Mrs. Huxam--a very vital
letter which I imagined she would show to you.  All she did was to
return it to me unopened.  That is senseless, because the position
must be defined.  We must know where we stand."

Barlow considered.

"It is defined," he answered.  "Nothing could be more definite and we
know where we stand very well.  You heard with your ears I
suppose--same as everybody else in court.  Your case broke down and
you became a laughing-stock to all honest men, and the judge summed
up against you and told you the fearful truth about yourself, to
which your own nature had long made you a stranger.  The case was
dismissed and you were left to pay the costs.  That's all there is to
it, Jacob Bullstone, and I suppose you don't want me or anybody else
to tell you what follows."

"That's exactly what I do want you to tell me; and that you might be
the better able to tell me, I wrote this letter, explaining how I
stand to you and your wife and my wife.  I have a right to ask you to
read it, Mr. Huxam."

"Not at all," answered the other.  "I don't grant you have any right
to ask anything."

Judith entered the shop at this moment, perceived the men were
talking and the woman in the postal department was listening.

"If you'll come through into the private room, Mr. Bullstone," she
said, "it will be better."

She lifted a bridge in the counter and he, winning hope from her
peaceful tone, followed into a room behind.  Barlow accompanied them
and explained to his wife.

"He says he's in his right we read his letter, and I deny it.  He has
no rights."

"Since he's forced himself here," she said in her quiet, level voice,
"he can listen, and then he can go.  But speak he shall not to me.
'Rights!'  What rights has a man who puts his wife away from him on a
foul lie?  What rights has a man who breaks up his home and drives
his family to fly from him for their salvation?  Let him understand
this: he doesn't exist for us any more.  We don't know him and don't
dirty our lips, or our thoughts, with his name.  Never--never, so
long as any of us live.  We're Christians here, and we have forgiven
the awful wrong done against us, because well we know that our Maker
called us to suffer it.  And I see clear enough now why.  But that's
our affair, and if we endure evil that good may come, that's no
reason why we should suffer the evil made flesh in the shape of this
man.  Far from it.  We've forgiven before our God; but before our God
also, we stand here and say we'll have no more truck with the source
of our sufferings and shame.  For us he is a nameless terror to fly
from, as we fly from his master, the Devil."

"Is that forgiveness?" asked Bullstone.

"It has nothing to do with forgiveness.  You are forgiven; but what
comes after is our duty to our Creator, who orders us to avoid evil
and all those damned to ever-lasting fire."

"Are you speaking for yourself alone?" he asked.

"No.  I'm speaking for my husband and family--my children and my
grandchildren.  By the will of God a lost soul, such as you are, can
be suffered to breed saved souls.  That's a mystery; but so it
happens.  And when your children come of age, they'll be faced with
their duty; and they'll see it very clear indeed.  Now I'll ask you
to go; and it will be better, when you have dealings with the
post-office, to send a messenger and never come again yourself so
long as we remain here."

She spoke slowly and without emotion.  Jacob looked at his
father-in-law.

"And do you say ditto to this devilish speech?" he asked.

"Ditto to every word of it," answered Barlow.  "And so would any man
who sees his wronged child wilting like a flower, and marks her
bitter sufferings and ruined home and broken heart.  And----"

"That's enough," interrupted Mrs. Huxam.  "That's nothing to him.
Tell him to go."

Jacob Bullstone did not speak and left the post-office immediately.

He began to grasp the situation at last, and surveyed his futile
ambitions since the trial.

"Time won't be balked," he thought.  "I was all wrong and stand worse
off than when I started."

He determined on huge patience and felt where the fight must lie.
Nothing was clear and nothing could be clear, until he saw his wife,
face to face, without witnesses.  Only a far future might open any
such opportunity, even if she allowed him to take it when it came.
His course seemed evident to him.  He must contrive through some
secret channel to learn what his wife was thinking and planning.  But
he doubted not that, unlike himself, her mind was still in flux and
no anodyne deadening her resentment.  Forgiveness, in any other than
a religious sense, must be vain for many days.

He leapt from one extreme to the other, and having sought an
understanding instantly, out of his instinctive rage for action, now
told himself that years must pass before any light could be hoped.
For a full twelve months he vowed to himself that he would not raise
a finger.  Half his savings had been swallowed up by the trial at
law.  He dwelt on the necessity for hard work and increase of
business, to make good this serious loss.  Work had proved a panacea
on many occasions of past tribulation; work had helped time to
stretch a gulf between former troubles and himself.  He must fall
back upon work now.

His punishment had begun and he prepared to welcome it, still
trusting time to bring some Indian summer for his later days.  He
admitted the justice of long-drawn retribution.  It was right that an
extended vengeance should be required.  He welcomed it and bent his
spirit to endure it, thus assuming a temporary pose and attitude
which it was impossible that his character could sustain.




CHAPTER IV

AUNA TRIES

Margery Bullstone had never poured herself out and lost her stream in
the river of her husband, after the fashion of certain devoted wives.
She had loved him truly, generously, until time and chance and the
wear and attrition of dissimilar natures fretted the love thin; but
her own individuality persisted always, being maintained by the close
touch which she kept with its sources: her parents and her old home.
Without that forcible influence she might have merged more completely
in Jacob and his interests; but her attitude to her mother had ever
been one of great respect and reverence, and she implanted the same
in her children, as they came to years of understanding.  A different
husband--one who saw life nearer her own vision--had, perhaps, won
her completely to the diminishing of other and earlier influences;
but Bullstone failed in this by his own limitations and oppositions;
therefore when the culmination came and his deep-rooted sickness
overthrew her home, Margery left Red House thankfully and regarded
her liberty with relief.

She was sustained in this emotion until after the excitement of the
trial, and everything, during the months before that event,
contributed to support her spirit; but only a false activity is that
of those who feed upon their wrongs; and when all was over and the
business of her future life had to be faced, there came gusts of
reaction to Margery and a realisation,--slow, fitful, painful--of the
change for the worse.  She caught herself looking back, and the
alterations in her mental and physical life bore fruit.  She was as
one suddenly widowed; but the inevitability brought by death and the
sense of a common lot was not here to help her endure the bewildering
dislocation and destruction.  All that she had made was gone, and she
was faced with the necessity to build up a new existence, differing
in every condition from the old.  Even peace was denied her.  She
could not think for herself, for every half-spoken thought was taken
out of her lips and developed by her mother.  She suffered
domination, but found it a sorry substitute for her old independence.
She could not be a child again.  Only her own children were left, and
from them, also, a new mind was demanded.  But they were going on
with their lives: her life had stopped, and none at present guessed
the psychological significance of this sudden hiatus in Margery's
existence.

She felt ill when she returned from London with her father, and
having participated in her triumph, slowly sickened at the aspect of
the future now presented and the convulsion created by dropping from
a full life into an empty one.  Her old physical weakness increased.
A change was urged upon her by the village doctor, who had always
attended her, and she went to stay with her uncle, Lawrence
Pulleyblank, at Plymouth.  But associations caused her to suffer so
acutely here, that it was clear nothing could be gained by present
sojourn in her uncle's house.  She came back to Brent, and then fell
the first shadow of implicit antagonisms between herself and her
mother.  For Judith contrived that Margery should not see her
children alone upon their constant visits; while she sought
opportunity to do so.  Mrs. Huxam indeed felt little need to insist
upon the condition, for she had no reason to doubt of her daughter's
attitude.  It was only a measure of precaution, and she had instilled
the need for silence upon all of them.  At present she detected no
premonition of mental weakness in Margery and did not anticipate it.
But her daughter's health was bad; she ate too little, shirked
exercise and remained melancholy, listless and indifferent.  Judith
held her state easy to understand, and had enough imagination to
grant that it must be some time before Margery would regain nerve,
courage and peace of mind; but that the woman, now idle and
incapacitated, was looking back and dwelling in the past, Mrs. Huxam,
though she might have granted, would not have regarded as likely.
The past could offer no healing drought for Margery.  She found easy
present occupation, therefore, drew her daughter into the shop
sometimes and contrived short errands for her.  Then Barlow pointed
out that to use Margery as though she were a child again was not
seemly.

To her father, Jacob's wife talked in a way she would not have spoken
before her mother.  Indeed her rare moments of animation belonged to
him, and he was glad to let her speak of the past and forget the
future in so doing.  She had aged and had grown indifferent to her
appearance; but the old, good days could still charm her into
forgetfulness, though from the pleasant memories, return to her new
life always brought reaction.  Her vitality grew less as her
instinctive desire for a different environment increased.

It was now understood that Jacob Bullstone's name should not be
spoken, and his children were directed neither to mention their
father, when they came to the post-office, nor convey any information
concerning their mother to Red House.  Jacob accepted this
arrangement, while Margery was also constrained to do so, since she
did not see her children alone.  John Henry abstained from Red House
after his parents parted, but he saw his mother weekly and, of
course, declared himself upon her side.

"And so is every one else," he told his grandmother; "and I feel
shame for the first time in my life--shame to know I'm my father's
son."

This attitude he openly confessed and it was not hidden from
Bullstone.

In Barlow Huxam's presence Margery sometimes allowed herself to speak
of her husband.  He flinched on the first occasion; but suffered it
afterwards, perceiving that she won some twilight satisfaction from
analysing the reason for her misfortune.

The new house rose rapidly and his daughter often accompanied the
postmaster to see progress on summer evenings, when the day's work
had ended and the labourers were gone.

At such times she indicated to him a little of the chaos of her
present days and their lack of everything that had made life worthy
to be lived.

"I was often sorry for myself," she said on one occasion, while they
had sat to rest on a pile of red tiles for the new roof.  "Sorry I
was; yet now looking back, father, I can see that, for all its frets,
I was leading a woman's full, bustling, busy life.  Often it was good
work, and the need to be planning and looking forward kept me hearty
and strong.  And now--all gone, and me turned so weak that I'm no
more use to anybody."

He bade her fasten upon the future.

"You did your duty in all things, and you need feel no remorse about
one hour of your married life," he said.  "That's ended for no fault
of yours, but through the disaster of marrying a dangerous madman--to
call him no worse.  Such lunatic men have often cut the throats of
their innocent wives; but he done otherwise, and if he'd cut his own,
he might have escaped a good deal that lies before him; and so might
you.  You must steadfastly fix before your mind that he has wronged
you in the awfulest way a man can wrong a good wife; and you must
also feel that, but for the mercy of God, worse things might well
have happened to you.  Put him out of your thoughts.  Banish him as
you would the vision of sin, Margery."

"Easy to say and easy to do sometimes; but not always," she answered.
"The difficulties that you and mother think are curing themselves
have hardly begun for me; because time works both ways.  It lessens
your pain; but it throws a different light on the sources of your
pain.  Some women would never lose sight of the wrong and I haven't
yet; but I'm weaker than a good many.  You want to be strong, like
mother, to hate for ever, and I ban't built to do it."

"You must seek strength from your mother then," he answered.  "She's
got strength for us all, and she hates evil unsleepingly, because her
mind is built on faith and justice and she looks out of eyes that
never grow dim."

"Yes, I know.  I love her.  In some of my moods I see how grand she
is; and in others I slink away, because, after all, there is such a
thing as mercy.  I've got time to think, and think nowadays as never
I had before.  There wasn't time to think in my married life, nor yet
leisure to weigh things and stand outside them.  I was in it all, and
you can't weigh things if you are part of the reason why they happen.
Now--torn away, or drove away--I can see Jacob better.  He knew so
little about real life and never seemed to want to know about it.  I
felt that Avis and John Henry had more sense of character and judged
people truer than he could.  He lived a very small life for choice,
and it made him narrow and fostered this awful thing in him, till it
grew up and wrecked him.  He loved nature, but nature couldn't keep
his mind sweet for long.  And justice sometimes makes me see that
what all looked such moonshine in the court, must have looked
horribly real to him--before he rose and struck me."

"Because he was insane on that one subject and bent everything to
that vile purpose."

"There it is!" she answered.  "That's the point.  If he was insane,
as you say, then where do we stand?  If those that are near and dear
to us turned lepers to-morrow, should we fly from them?  I feel a
great deal has to be thought and said on that view, father; but I
know nothing will come of it with mother, because she never changes.
To her, madness is one thing and wickedness another; but grant
madness, then there's no wickedness."

Mr. Huxam was a little startled before this attitude; for Margery had
never yet indicated weakening, and these words clearly pointed in
that direction.

"You're on dangerous ground and had better not pursue it," he
answered.  "We know where we stand, and when I said the man was a
lunatic, I meant no more than a figure of speech.  All sin may be
madness seen one way; but we don't treat all sinners as madmen, else
there'd be more ready to be locked up than we could find
fellow-creatures to guard them.  Your mother was right there--as
usual.  Forgive him as a Christian must; but don't keep twisting back
to him in your mind.  He's gone for ever; and if I thought, even in
your dreams, that you could feel like going back to him, Margery, I
should take a very grave view of such a fault."

"No, I wouldn't go back to him--any more than he could come back to
me.  For why should we think, because we won against him, that we've
convinced him he was wrong?"

Mr. Huxam considered.

"We keep this subject from you, because our feeling is that it's very
indecent and unbecoming and unworthy of the family to mention it," he
answered, "but, since we're on it, through no choice of mine, my
child, I must tell you once for all the latest facts.  I'll ask you
to keep what I'm going to say to yourself, for your mother might
blame me to mention it; but men--even madmen--will talk, and you
can't always command them to be silent, or refuse to hear what they
desire to tell you.  And Jacob Bullstone, in the ear of his old
friend, William Marydrew, has acknowledged that he was wrong in every
particular.  He wrote after the trial--a letter which he first sent
to your mother and then brought to the shop himself; and your mother
saw him with me--for the last time--and refused to read the letter.
I won't say I wouldn't have read it; but that's only to admit I
haven't got the strength to judge right in a crisis like she has.
But there's no doubt that in that letter he said things we might, as
Christians, have been glad to hear--for his own soul's sake."

"Mother was right, however," declared Margery, "and whether he ever
could endure to see me, or whether he could not, it's very certain I
must be myself in that matter.  I hope to God he knows he was wrong
and is convinced of it, but go back to him--I couldn't now; but--oh,
I'm weak as well as strong.  Jacob wasn't all, father.  A husband
isn't a home.  I loved such a lot of little things.  Being denied
pleasure away, I made my first and dearest pleasure there, and I did
so care for plants and trees and childish things.  And the river and
the hills--to me all such like meant a lot.  The garden was work and
play both.  If smoothed the harsh edges.  I made it and I made my
children altogether.  And the river and the hills meant love--for I
loved them; and they helped me to love Jacob when I felt I never
should again; because they brought back the old Jacob I fell in love
with.  All this sounds silly to you; but twenty years is a long
time--the cream of my life--the greatest part of it for a woman, when
she's reigning in her home and bringing her children into the world.
Red House means more than I can say--everything--good and bad alike.
To me it's like the shop to you--life.  You know where to put your
hand on everything.  You could serve blindfold.  And, if I went back
to-day, I could shut my eyes and go to the flowers in the garden and
know which were out and which were dead and which were in bud.
And--but--no, no, no!  It all means nothing now.  I couldn't go
back--never--never."

He soothed her, but felt considerable alarm himself before these
confidences.  For if Margery entertained such thoughts now--removed
from her wrongs by only a few months--how might she regard the
situation in a year, or two years?  That she should even assert that
she could not go back, argued most unexpected weakness in Mr. Huxam's
opinion, for when a woman was at the trouble to say she would not do
a thing, that generally signified the action was by no means ruled
out for her.

The stupendous thought of an ultimate condonation made him giddy--not
before the spectacle of a forgiving Margery, but at the vision of
Mrs. Huxam and the Everlasting.

He alluded to the latter.

"The Lord thy God is a jealous God--remember that, my child, when any
shadow of regret for the past steals into your mind.  It's time you
braced yourself, Margery.  I think you might begin working here in
the new garden."

But she shook her head.

"Not yet," she said.  "I'm not strong enough in mind or body yet.
Flowers would hurt too much, father.  I'm going to love your new
house, and I'm going to live in it along with you; but flowers won't
die.  There's some flowers never can die for me, though they withered
away a good few years ago.  I shall always see them and smell them
and hear the honey bees humming in 'em.  But there are some I'll
never touch no more."

She was worn out after this conversation and Barlow hesitated long
upon the propriety of discussing the matter with Judith; but he
postponed any warning in that quarter.  Margery had some return of
her nervous weakness and was very silent for many days; while both
parents exercised patience and Mrs. Huxam began to consider the
desirability of definite steps.  For her daughter's health and the
doctor's anxiety pointed to the need of distraction and change.

Judith busied herself to learn Margery's view, but could win no
expression or desire from her respecting her future.  Then she went
to Plymouth to consult her brother, Lawrence.  It occurred to her
that his niece might perhaps make her permanent abode with the old
man and find a sphere of usefulness in ministering to him.

Thus it fell out that, for once, Margery did win opportunity for a
long conversation with a child; and it happened to be the one child
who regarded no ground as forbidden, and rejoiced at the chance to
say things with which her young heart was full.

Auna came and brought a large can full of the famous goats' milk; nor
had her grandfather the heart to prevent her from carrying it to her
mother, though his conscience reproached him afterwards.

To Margery came Auna and brightened at the unexpected freedom, while
her mother drank at the child's command and shut her eyes that the
familiar flavour of the milk might bring a thousand pictures to her
mind.  The visions began happily.  Then they ended in darkness--on a
February day, when seeking the goats, she had met with her husband
hidden on the hill.  For thus it was with all her memories; they were
prone to break off in a sorrow.  Every train of thought ran into
grief--and stopped there; and she told herself that this must be
surely so, since life itself had now run into grief and stopped.  She
knew well enough, at the bottom of her heart, that she could never
begin again and start a new existence.  Some women might have been
strong enough to do so.  Pride might have driven many to build up a
new fabric; some, out of natural energy, physical strength and
fulness of life, might have survived; but she could not.  Nothing
that waited for her would be of a zest to make like worth living; and
yet she spoke the truth when she told her father that she would not
return to Red House.  That she firmly believed; nor could she
conceive of any circumstance to change the determination.

Auna struck a new note on the occasion of this visit and she was very
frank and clear about it.

"There's always a terrible lot in me I can't say afore grandmother,"
she declared; "and I don't know whether it's right, or whether it's
wicked, mother; but I'm never going to stop loving father and I won't
pretend different.  Nobody knows how wicked he's been better than
poor father does, and his sins properly choke him when he's along
with me sometimes.  And----"

"Don't you talk about father, Auna.  That's forbid and you know it.
We've all forgiven each other and you'll understand better some day."

"But he doesn't understand you've forgiven him.  Nobody's told him
you have.  But I shall, now you've said it.  And I'm just going to be
fifteen year old and I do understand.  Father thought you'd done
something wicked and that was wicked of him, because he ought to have
known very well you couldn't do nothing wicked.  But he thought you
had so cruel certain, that it all had to be tried by a judge.  And
then father found out he'd thought wrong; and now his hair be turning
grey about it and he can't lift up his head from looking at the
ground.  And if he knew how to show more sorrow than he does show, he
would--I know he would."

"Leave him, Auna.  But be sure to tell him I've forgiven him.  And
say I'm going to drink the milk.  And now talk about something
different.  I bid you, Auna."

"Very well, then, dear mother," said the girl.  "Peter be going to
the veterinary surgeon to Exeter for six months soon now, to learn
all about the sicknesses that come over dogs; and then father says
he'll know everything there is to the dogs, and more than he does
himself.  Though that Peter never will.  And Avis--Robert's terrible
set on marrying her, and he's coming to ax father if he may do so
this very night.  But that's a secret hidden from father.  And
father----"

The child could not keep her father off her tongue.

"Tell me about the dogs and the river and the garden," said Margery.

Auna collected her thoughts.

"The dogs are very well indeed and a lot of new puppies, and 'The
Lord of Red House' be the father of them; and Peter says their paws
promise them to be grand dogs.  And Mr. Middleweek, the new man since
Mr. Gill went, is very different from him.  He never whines and never
says the work's killing him, nor cusses the goats, nor anything like
that.  And Peter says he's very clever with the dogs, but won't come
to no good in the next world, because he haven't found God.  But
Peter says that what Mr. Middleweek does about the next world is his
own business, and he won't quarrel with him as long as he does so
clever what he's got to do in this world."

"Peter's a lot with the dogs now?"  asked Margery, and her daughter
answered that he was.

"And the river's lovelier than ever this year," she ran
on--"especially the little island we call 'Mother's Island,' where
Avis found that white bluebell.  And it came up again this year.  And
your own garden, mother, is a proper show of flowers.  And the roots
you planted in the fall have come up, all but one or two.  And the
red peony seemed to know you wasn't going to be there and he haven't
took the trouble to flower at all this year."

She ran on and Margery listened, saying very little but smiling once
or twice.

She asked a few questions about trifles that interested her and Auna
answered or promised to learn the answers.

Then they joined Mr. Huxam in his parlour behind the shop and took
tea together.  Auna discussed Jeremy and Jane.  She was very
interested in their two infant boys and much cast down because the
second proved to be delicate.

Margery remembered a book or two and Auna promised to bring them, but
Barlow forbade it.

"Not at present," he said.  "That would be to create a doubtful
precedent.  We'd better wait for anything like that, unless the book
was yours before you married."

Her grandfather was acutely conscious of the difficulties attending
the situation of Auna.  Margery's other children continued to be
entirely identified with her, and Judith felt satisfied that soon
enough they would have broken with the evil influence that begot
them; but Auna had developed a decision that remained to be dealt
with.  She came and went, and not seldom mentioned her father from
force of habit, only to be corrected for so doing.  Her grandmother
already perceived a problem here, but trusted herself to solve it.

When Mr. Huxam had gone and they were alone again, the girl returned
to her father.

"I know I mustn't name him to grandfather and grandmother, but just
once more you'll let me, mother.  Say just once."

"What's the use, child?  You must learn to understand that father's
gone out of my life.  He hasn't gone out of yours.  He's part of
yours, and I'm glad you love him, because there's only you to do that
now.  But grandmother's quite right to ask you not to mention father
any more here."

"Why?" asked Auna.  "Father doesn't tell me not to talk about you.
He loves me to do it."

"Anyway you'll do what you're told to do here, I know."

"Very well then--this is the last--last time I'll name him.  And if
he ever slips out again, it will be an accident, mother.  But--the
last time, mind--but, don't you think just once--just once, for a
little moment, you could see him?  You've got such a lot of time on
your hands now and you might take a walk and just----"

"Did he ask you to ask me, Auna?"

"Not exactly asked me.  He said it would be a great blessing and a
sign he was forgiven if you could let him speak to you but once.  And
I said so it would; and I told him that first time I got a chance,
behind grandmother's back, I'd ask you.  And oh, mother, why not?"

"For countless reasons, Auna.  You'll tell him I've forgiven him.
We've long passed the forgiving stage here.  Everybody has forgiven
father.  And what more is there?"

"There's father."

"I mustn't do it.  I don't want to do it, Auna.  You can't understand
yet, but you will when you're older.  He will understand."

"You don't want to see father?"

"No, no, no--I don't want to see him again.  I've suffered enough."

Auna was very quiet for some time.

"You wouldn't like to come and see your lovely garden, if father
promised to go up to Huntingdon for the day?" she asked.  "Surely,
mother, you'd like to see the dogs and your garden?"

"It's not my garden any more.  I've got no garden.  I've got nothing
but you and Avis and the boys."

Auna tried again.

"How sorry must he feel, before you can forgive him enough to see
him?" she asked.

"I have forgiven him.  I wish I could make your little mind grasp it,
Auna.  I know father better than you do.  I know how sorry he is; but
sorrow can't undo what's done.  Nothing could be gained if I saw
father, and a great deal must be lost.  There are others to think of.
We are all in God's Hands.  Now you ought to be trotting home."

"God's Hands are cold comfort if you won't see father," murmured the
child.  "I don't much like what I hear about God from Mr. Middleweek."

Margery reproved her.

"If you want to hear about God, go to your grandmother," she said,
"and never listen to anybody else.  You ought to know that well
enough, Auna."

"I shall always listen to father whenever he talks to me," answered
the girl.  "And I've told father that I well know God's forgiven him."

She left soon afterwards, very quietly and much depressed, while
Margery speculated on the situation and became aware that, against
the forces of right and justice and religion, destined to stand
between her husband and herself for the remainder of their lives,
there would be opposed a girl's will.  She saw a time when her
daughter would be called to choose; and she was glad that Auna would
most certainly fling in her lot with Jacob.  She still believed, with
her mother, that souls were involved, and, therefore, felt it guilty
to be glad.

And Bullstone, knowing that the child might to-day get free speech
with Margery, had not slept for two nights until the result of Auna's
effort reached him.  He had not directed her to do this, but he could
not forbid it.  The inspiration was hers and he believed that it came
from something greater than Auna.  He walked to meet her and his
heart beat hard as her slight figure came swinging along through the
lane beyond Shipley Farm.

She kissed him and he waited for her to speak as they walked homeward
together; but she did not speak for a little while.  Then she told
the best thing she had to tell.

"Mother's going to drink the milk, father."

"Tell me," he answered.  "Don't hold it back.  Can she see me?"

"No, father."

"Does she want to see me?"

Auna hesitated, then spoke.

"No, father."

Then they walked together quite silently until something happened to
distract their thoughts.  A quick step overtook them beside the river
and Robert Elvin, his day's work done, saluted them.

"Thought I might get over for a bite of supper, Mr. Bullstone,
because I was very wishful to have a word or two."

"And welcome, Bob.  How's things?"

"All right--all very right I believe.  I'd like for you to see the
mangolds.  The rain have fetched them up proper and the guano be
doing wonders.  So it is at Bullstone John Henry tells me."

That night after the evening meal, Bob approached his future
father-in-law on the great theme and begged to marry Avis within the
year.

Robert was a little independent--so his listener thought.

"My mother sees nothing against it and Avis is willing," he said, "so
I hope it may happen by your leave, Mr. Bullstone."

Jacob, morbid now in the presence of other people, detected, or
imagined that he detected, a changed note in all who accosted him.
And often he did do so, for a great weight of censure had rolled in
upon him since his error and many derived a sense of personal right
doing and right thinking when they said the obvious things concerning
him.  But the significance of what he had done did not oppress the
younger generation since they had no experience of life to weigh its
implications.  Robert was too busy about his own affairs to trouble
concerning the misfortunes of other folk.  He had no intention to be
anything but respectful.

"If Avis is agreeable, as you say, then so it shall be, Bob,"
promised Jacob.  Indeed the idea had already dwelt in his mind for
other reasons than the happiness of young Elvin.  In the ceaseless
examination of all paths, in the pursuit of every faint thread which
might lead to the heart of his hopes, Bullstone had not neglected the
matter of his daughter's marriage.  For there, if only for a moment
in time, he might possibly hope to meet on common ground with the
mother of Avis.  He told himself that humanity would pardon a natural
and seemly meeting on the occasion of a child's marriage.  None could
protest at that; and while he knew, and smarted to know, that many
held his desire--to receive back his wronged wife--as only another
offence; while, indeed, brutally faced in certain, unexpected
quarters with harsh censure, when he had confided, as he thought, in
sympathetic ears; and while consequently driven to lock his hopes out
of sight, since they were held shameless, yet in the matter of Avis,
he did see an opportunity against which it would be hard to take
exception.  The girl must marry from her father's home; was it too
much to hope that her mother would see a way to come under his roof
on the occasion, if only for an hour?  By night the possibility
seemed to take substance; by day, when his mind was clearer, it
faded; and to-night, though he spoke amiably to Robert and promised
the wedding should take place after the harvest, he felt less
sanguine than usual.  He had expected this interview and desired it;
he had fancied it would cheer him and bring some hope, but now that
it had come, the light was quenched in anticipation by what he had
just heard from Auna.

Yet he struck a cheerful note, and it was not Jacob but Avis who
viewed the matter differently, and brought him back to the fact that
the past was not to be missed even in this matter.  Robert called her
when he heard that they might wed, and she came into the kitchen,
where her father sat, and thanked him.  Jacob declared his good
pleasure.

"And we'll do it in style I promise you," he said with ill-feigned
ardour.  "You shall have a good send-off, and a good honeymoon, too,
before you start life in double harness."

"And after our marriage, you're going to settle Owley on me, aren't
you, father?" asked Avis.  "I don't ask for inquisitiveness, but only
so as we shall know how we stand."

"Yes, I am.  That was a promise.  And I'll add this: that I shall
waive the rent as soon as ever I see my way clear."

"Not from the start, however?" asked Bob.

"Not from the start--no.  Circumstances have called upon me for a
good deal of money lately and--however, the future's yours.  Whatever
else they haven't got, the young have always the future."

Avis looked uncomfortable, feeling that the present was the time to
speak concerning details.  She was sorry for herself and suffered a
disappointment which to one of her nature did not lack for edge.  She
had dreamed of a very fine wedding indeed, but had been told by her
grandmother that any such hope would have to be abandoned.  The fact
she now declared, and her regret lent unconscious tartness to her
speech.

"I can't have a gay wedding, father, and no doubt you know why.  You
wouldn't have a gay wedding with a death in the house, and what's
happened is a long way worse than that."

She repeated a speech that she had heard from her grandmother on the
same subject, and Jacob stared, but did not answer.

"That's the worst of a thing like what you've done, father.  It don't
stop where it belongs, and my wedding's got to suffer with everything
else."

Her father flushed, but he restrained himself and she stung on.

"You was always such a man for peace, and now you'll soon have
it--that's something."

Then Robert spoke.  The ill-temper of Avis was a surprise to him.

"Have done," he said.  "I don't want to hear you lecture your father."

He spoke rather sternly and Jacob answered him.

"Better stand up for her, not me, Bob.  You'll soon know which side
your bread's buttered with my fine Avis.  The wedding shall be as she
pleases."

Then he left them and they went out into the twilight together, Avis
a little alarmed.

She was soon forgiven, for she elaborated her grievance and explained
to Robert how the disaster that had overtaken Red House, wrecked not
only her mother's life, but cast its shadow over her own.  She
pretended more than she felt and he consoled her as best he might,
for he was much in love and shared her regrets at the passing
misfortune, but broke away from it to their own surer future.

"There's a screw loose in such a lot of married people," he said.
"Don't think I haven't seen it.  It was under my eyes while my father
was fighting death.  Thank God you and me are different.  We know
each other's natures down to the quick, and nothing could ever rise
up against love like ours."

Elsewhere Jacob mused over his recent experience.

"She's grown up," he reflected.  "No doubt a moment in time comes
like that, when a man's child, that he still held to be a child,
flings off childhood and stands out before him full-fledged man, or
woman.  And for certain the shock, when it falls, is oftener painful
than not."

He considered how this apotheosis of his elder daughter might have
hurt him once, though little likely to surprise him.  But now it
lacked all power to hurt and left him indifferent.  She was gone in
spirit long ago; and John Henry was gone; and Peter thought more of
George Middleweek's opinions than of his.  Yet how trivial were these
losses and dismemberments now.  For life, like the sleight of sun and
shadow on hills and valleys, had cast down and lifted up, had
transformed the shifting scenery of his existence, so that things
before invisible stared out upon him and the old landmarks and
comfortable places, the nook and dingle, the blue hill and
music-making waters, were obliterated and blotted from the theatre in
which he moved.  Light glared pitiless where shadows had mercifully
spread; gloom threw a pall over what had seemed most stable, most
gracious and assured.  Did the dogs look at him with the old
adoration in their eyes?  Was it possible that the miasma he trailed
could miss their sensitive nostrils?  He often hungered for
Huntingdon and the white, squab house under the sycamores; but he put
the thought from him as a weakness.  Not there homed reality; not
there could he perform his penance, or justify the undying hope that
still burned up and, with its flickering promise, faintly revived the
old images and fought the new darkness that hung heavy upon them.




CHAPTER V

REVENGE

Now opportunity thrust another into the affairs of Jacob
Bullstone--one who never occupied a moment of his own thoughts, but
who, none the less, was deeply concerned with him.

Unknown and unguessed by his brother, or his aunt, Samuel Winter's
weak brain was suffering a stormy assault and gradually reaching a
very dangerous decision on the subject of his brother's wrongs.
Affairs that leapt instantly to the zenith in a normal intellect,
mounted by slow degrees for him; thus his purpose only matured long
after the summits of emotion in other men and women were passed.  He
had taken the matter of Adam's affront very much to heart, and while
scarcely able to appreciate the details or understand their
significance, none the less grasped that the master of Red House had
done Adam an injury beyond any atonement.  He had listened to his
aunt's furious comments on the disaster and shared her indignation;
he had perceived that, while unspeakable evil resulted from
Bullstone's errors, the criminal went unrestrained and apparently
unpunished.  This he resented.  Samuel's theory of justice embraced
active retaliation for wrong done, and he held it a grievance that
Jacob should be none the worse after his offences.  He found the
matter fasten on his waking thoughts; and he harboured dreams of a
great revenge that should be worthy of the occasion.  While the rest
of the world had cooled its anger; while even a shadow of regret for
both sufferers appeared here and there, doubtfully uttered by a
seeing woman or sentimental man, Samuel reached gradually to the
climax of his private hate.  Bullstone must be struck hard, and from
this conviction, all unknown and unguessed, Sammy's faulty wits led
him to a still more tremendous conclusion.  Long brooding, and a
gathering weight of indignation at the injustice of Jacob's escape,
decided the crazy creature to destroy him and rid the world of an
evil thing.  He would kill the enemy as he killed vermin.  Thus a
grave, physical peril now hung over Bullstone, and there was none to
warn him, since Samuel took care that not a whisper of his project
should be heard.  He had the wit to guess that his brother might
condemn it; but believed notwithstanding that, after the event, Adam
must be the first to praise.

At this stage in his remorseless progress, chance lent itself to
Samuel's purpose and he accepted an opportunity.  For once the muddy
currents of his intelligence flowed swiftly and he struck, after a
fashion more worthy of a knave than a fool.

Jacob Bullstone, exploring every channel and considering each human
figure that might be regarded as a link between himself and his wife,
had thought of late upon her brother.  He had observed that Jeremy
now avoided him and, until the present, had not thought to challenge
the younger man, or thrust any needless difficulty upon his life; but
there came a sudden conviction that through his brother-in-law a
possible approach to Margery might be obtained.  He yearned to put
circumstances before her and had endeavoured to do so by letter; but
the letters were returned by the hand of Auna, and when the girl once
more visited her mother with messages, she was told very plainly that
she must obey former commands and not mention her father again.
Failure to keep this order would mean denial of her mother to her.

Bullstone, considering ways and means, desired to furnish Margery
with money, and his lawyer assured him that there existed no
objection to so doing.  He was impoverished himself and knew well
enough that his wife would take nothing from him, yet the thought
persisted, among other thoughts, and he strove to create from it, if
possible, some sort of tie between himself and his partner.  He told
himself that if once the slenderest thread of communication might be
established and recognised, upon that he would build and build, until
something vital were accomplished.

Therefore he turned to Jeremy.  He did not go to the green-grocer's,
but waited a chance meeting, and when that fell out, in a manner very
convenient to the purpose, he stopped the other and, to Jeremy's
discomfort, insisted on having speech with him.  Huxam had been to
see some apples with a view to purchasing them on the trees, and he
was returning from an orchard in the valley above Brent, when he met
Jacob face to face, in a lane, and found it impossible to avoid him.
He was hastening past, with his face turned to the ground, when his
brother-in-law blocked the way.

"Well met," he said.  "I've been wanting half a dozen words with you,
Jeremy.  I won't keep you.  I'll walk along with you."

"Mr. Bullstone," answered the other, "I'd rather you didn't.  It's
all over between your family and mine, and I earnestly beg you'll not
speak to me."

"I must.  You must endure it.  I suppose you're a just man.  I'm not
going to say anything on my own account--only on your sister's.  She
has rights and I have obligations.  These must be recognised; but
your parents come between me and my duty in that matter and won't
listen to me, or my lawyer, though he's tried to make them.  They
oppose a blank wall to me out of ignorance.  Some might say out of
malice; but I say out of ignorance."

"What d'you want to rip things up for?  It isn't dignified of you to
stop me; you ought to know better."

"Dignity don't come into it.  Just listen.  I've been a good friend
to you anyway.  You're not going to deny that.  Then treat me as an
unfortunate man who comes to you quite reasonably and properly,
things being as they are.  There's much that must be said, and
propositions must be heard, and it may be in your power to help
Margery to see another opinion than her mother's--not my opinion, but
the law's opinion.  You understand money and you know what a husband
owes his wife, whether he's wronged her or not.  I admit everything;
I acknowledge everything and none can make me out worse than I am;
but I'm human.  I want to do what's right, and no Christian ought to
deny me the power to do what's right.  Everything I've got is my
wife's if she will take it.  She's living on her father and mother
now.  They won't even suffer her to have her clothes."

"It's no business of mine," said Jeremy.  "All the same, I see what
you mean.  If I get a chance, I'll speak to her.  I'm cruel sorry
about all this.  It's become a matter of religion in my mother's
mind, or else things might be possible I dare say."

"No religion denies a man the right to do his duty, whatever he's
been."

"I'll mention it and see how she looks at it.  Not that you can
expect any of us to trouble about you, or your duty either.  No
member of my family ever stood between a man and his duty, all the
same.  My parents may not have looked at it in that light.  Money's
money every time.  If I don't know that, who should?"

"It is her money and her children's after her."

The other considered.

"Strictly between ourselves," he said, "I may tell you I don't see
quite eye to eye with my mother in this affair.  Men take a larger
view than women and, of course, there's two sides to every question.
My parents are getting on and, in the course of nature--well, as far
as Margery's concerned she's provided for; but I am not.  You've got
to be worldly-wise with a wife and family and--in a word, nothing is
yet settled about me and Jane.  My mother's been far too upset by
these disasters to think about us.  But the time has come when we've
got to be thought about.  Yes, I'll talk to Margery.  She may not
look at it exactly like mother.  Jane says that Margery doesn't.  I
don't know.  I seldom see her.  And--well, they talk of going into
their villa residence at the end of the year; and nothing settled
about the business.  To forgive is human after all.  There's somebody
coming.  You'd better turn here, afore they see who it is.  I'll keep
it in mind.  I'll get speech with her next time she comes to see us,
and try to find if she feels anything in particular."

"On the general question--not only money--the general question of a
possible reconciliation.  Thank you gratefully."

Jeremy quickened his pace, and Jacob stopped and turned back.  He
guessed that the other had become thus amenable through some private
inspiration bearing on his own welfare; but the motive mattered not.
He had said great things--words beyond measure heartening to Jacob.
For, if Margery did not echo her mother; if Jane had actually
recorded that important fact, then hope surely existed.  That being
so, let him but break down one of the barriers, and the rest might
presently fall.  He believed that much might come of this meeting, if
Jeremy kept his promise, and for a time the thought exalted him.

In this mood he passed Samuel Winter returning home with 'Turk.'
Before them opened a field over which ran a footpath--a short cut to
Shipley Bridge--and Jacob, though Samuel never now acknowledged him
save with a snort and a scowl, held open the gate for the bull and
wished the man good evening.

He received no response, however, beyond an unfriendly gleam from
Sammy's heavy eyes; then he pushed on to cross the meadow, and
quickly forgot Adam's brother under the weight of his own thoughts.
He was, however, speedily reminded.  The meadow extended for two
hundred yards, with the river, under a steep bank, on the west of it,
and a stone wall, where ran the road, to the east.  Road and river
met at Shipley Bridge and here the field narrowed to a point, where
stood another gate for cattle and carts, and a stile for foot
passengers.

Then it was that Sammy walking thirty yards behind Jacob won his
inspiration and acted upon it, with lightning rapidity.  The supreme
enemy stood at his mercy for one minute, and between them stalked a
formidable engine of destruction.  Samuel well knew what to do, for
he remembered once how a man, flinging away a lucifer match at a
show, had dropped it on 'Turk's' neck, and how the bull had behaved
on that occasion.  He was firmly tethered at the time, otherwise some
lives had paid forfeit.  Now Samuel shook out his pipe upon the
monster's back and loosed the rope from the ring in his nose.  The
fire stung and 'Turk' responded.  His head went up.  He was conscious
of assault and, at the same time, perceived a man thirty yards ahead
of him.  He protested audibly, to Samuel's regret, then put down his
head and in a royal rage charged the unconscious Jacob, where he
walked deep in thought.  But for the shrill, warning bellow of the
beast, he had been doomed and must have been struck almost at the
moment he became conscious of the peril; but he heard, looked round,
saw the angry bull and its keeper, and, with a start of thirty yards,
began to run.  His legs, however, could not save him and he
hesitated, while he ran, as to whether the wall or the river promised
the better chance.  He stood midway between them and decided for the
stream, since once over the bank he would be safe, while at the wall
he must needs lose vital moments before he could climb it.  The bull
was very near--nearer than he knew--and Jacob unconsciously saved
himself by a sudden swerve to the left, for as he twisted, his enemy
went past so close that its left, lowered horn tore his breeches.  He
still had near thirty yards to go and the bull pulled up and doubled
almost as fast as the man; but now, alive to his danger, Jacob ran
amazingly fast for one of his age and size.  He took a straight line
to the river and just reached the bank two yards before his pursuer.
He plunged straight on, ignorant of what might be beneath and 'Turk'
stopped with his fore feet on the brink.  There he trampled and
screamed, but was unsighted and did not mark the enemy, who had
fallen through a thicket of alder overhanging the river a dozen feet
below.

Bullstone might have escaped with nothing but a wetting and bad
shaking, but for the unfortunate accident of a dead tree stump.  This
heavy snag extended over a pool and he fell across it and turned a
somersault into six feet of water.  He had, however, struck the tree
trunk with his right leg and broken his thigh.  He heard the snap and
knew that a bone was gone; but he kept his nerve and, guessing that
the bull had been set upon him, could not tell whether Samuel Winter
might not descend and finish the murder he had planned.  He stopped
in the water therefore and floating down with the stream, holding
himself up by the bank, reached the cover of an overhanging ledge and
remained beneath it motionless.

Samuel, however, was content with his achievement.  He looked over,
saw no sign of the enemy, doubted not that he was drowned and roared
with laughter.  Then he turned to the heaving bull, slapped its neck,
kissed its nose, and heaped affectionate curses upon it.  Presently,
thrusting his rope through the monster's ring, he led it away.

Jacob heard him go, but found that without the water to support him
he could not stand.  His leg was powerless and he felt the broken
bone probing the flesh.  He crawled out on the farther bank of the
river and lay flat.  He felt faint at the unfamiliar exertion and
suffered pain also; but he waited for some time, not daring to lift
his voice until Samuel might be out of hearing.  The terrible
incident seemed not particularly dreadful to him.  Sudden death
offered no terrors; yet he was thankful to live, for he desired much
to happen before he died.  Death, indeed, might be already upon him,
for he felt very ill; but his mind remained clear.  He could find it
in him to sorrow for Adam Winter before this disaster.  This would
bring more suffering upon him, for the madman might have to be shut
up.

It was thanks to Samuel himself that the broken man endured but a
short suspense.  Jacob had determined to raise no alarm until good
space of time had passed; and before he lifted his voice assistance
came, for Samuel, returning home in great glee, put up the bull, then
told his aunt of the adventure.

"I've done for the beastly man," he said.  "Bully went for him and
horched his thigh and just missed him by a hair, then he ran for the
river and Turk after him like a long-dog,[1] and in went Bullstone,
tail over head, and was drowned, thank the watching Lord!  A good
day's work and may I never do a worse."


[1] _Long-dog_--Greyhound.


Amelia listened and took good care not to condemn Samuel, for censure
was gall to him.  She left him at his tea a moment later and ran for
Adam, who was milking.  Thus it happened that within half an hour of
his downfall, Jacob saw Winter running over the field, heard his
shout and answered him.

In less than another half hour Adam had brought round a flat-bottomed
pig-cart with blankets and pillows.  Two men assisted him and
Bullstone was lifted as gently as might be.  Then Winter himself
drove the injured man to Brent cottage hospital, while a labourer
proceeded to Red House with the news.




CHAPTER VI

THE WITCH DOCTOR

Jacob's illness followed a straightforward and satisfactory course.
It offered no marked features and awoke interest rather for its
cause, than itself, or the sufferer.  A week after he was known to be
on the way to recovery, his wife went to see her brother.  Jeremy
had, after the accident, kept his mouth shut and taken no steps to
advance her husband's hopes, but to-day Margery herself spoke such
words as none had yet heard from her.

Bullstone's disastrous adventure did not lack for dramatic telling in
Auna's version.  For once she demanded to speak of her father, and
she quickened her description with many tears.  Nor could the event
fail to deepen Margery's own emotions.  She was not built to maintain
an obdurate attitude to any experience, and whatever her present
angle of vision, after speech with her mother, her spirit quickened
and her flesh yearned.  There seemed only one place for her at this
time; and that was at her husband's bedside; there offered only one
seemly channel of duty: to be nursing him.  Life was short.  She
hungered terribly for an understanding and sympathetic spirit to help
her at this crisis, and found that, after all, despite the tragedy of
his long outrage and cruel assault, her husband was still nearest,
and still quickest to reach the depths of her.  Then thought,
advancing upon this conviction, painted a new and another Jacob.  She
was aware that the whole world set sternly against him and,
misreading the attempted murder, suspected that, perhaps, even Adam
Winter might not have forgiven him.  Surely it must have been some
fiery word from Adam that prompted Samuel to his attempt.  Yet there
she hesitated and, on second thoughts, remembered Adam better.
Doubtless he had pardoned long ago; but mad Samuel none the less
echoed the people, and she knew, from what her father had told her,
that the country side was more interested in Jacob's disaster than
regretful of it.  Their sole regret went out for the brother and the
aunt of the man responsible.

Now, despondent and bewildered, Margery found some comfort in talking
openly to her brother and his wife.

She took tea with them on a Sunday and was unguarded and indifferent
as to what they might say, or think, of her opinion.  They perceived
the change in her and set it down to Jacob's situation; but though
that had largely served to stimulate Margery and offer a point for
argument with her parents, it did not account for the radical and
growing operations of her soul.  The inevitable had happened, and
with all its sorrows and trials, she yet wanted back her life as it
was, sanctified to her by custom.  She yearned for the home that she
had made and her spirit could rise to no other.  She was changed,
weakened a little mentally, as well as much physically, by her
experiences, more frightened of life and less desirous to face it.
Now she longed only for quiet--to be secluded and hidden away,
forgotten and left alone.  She did not dread solitude, silence, peace
any more.  She desired them before all things and wearied
inexpressibly of the noise of the street, the bustle of business and
the din of activity round about her.  Among the many facts learned
with increasing certainty, was the assurance that she would soon
sicken and die, cooped here under the eyes of her parents--an object
of pity for her father, of triumph for Judith.

These convictions she voiced to Jane, and whimsically lamented that
situation which all just persons supposed she was most thankful to
have escaped for ever.

"Time blots out the bad and leaves the good still to remind you," she
said.  "You may not believe it, but it is so.  I always remember the
happy things and slip the unhappy.  It's not only things that happen,
but people that made them happen.  Get far enough away from people,
and you find the parts in them you hate grow dimmer and the parts you
like grow brighter.  That's why the natural feeling is to speak
kindly of the dead.  We generally feel kindly to them.  At least I
do."

"It's true," declared Jane.  "When anybody's dead, part of 'em always
rises up again on people's tongues, and we don't speak well of them
who are dead only because they are dead and can't defend themselves,
but because time, as you say, Margery, keeps the good and lets the
bad go.  I can say it to you and Jeremy, though I wouldn't to anybody
else.  Take your own mother.  I always feel ever so much kinder to
her when I escape from hearing her, or seeing her for a week or so."

"You oughtn't to say that, Jane," declared her husband.  "It's a very
doubtful speech."

"Not it," she answered.  "No use pretending.  You don't see your
mother like the rest of the world, because she don't see you like the
rest of the world.  And Margery's right.  If she don't know, who
should?"

"Ask yourself, Jane.  You're married and have got plenty of sense to
see things.  Suppose Jeremy and you was parted for some great,
terrible deed done by him: a bee in Jeremy's bonnet, for which he was
sorry enough.  And suppose, with time, you hadn't only forgiven him,
as a Christian, but really and truly, as a wife and a woman.  And
suppose everything--everything that had made your life, and that
you'd made of your life, was taken away, and you were left stranded.
What would it be to you?"

"Hell," said Jane frankly.  "There's no other word for it."

"And what would you do, Jeremy, if that had happened to you?"
continued his sister.  "Would you feel that, for her soul's sake,
Jane must never come back to you?"

"I'm glad to say no such thing could happen to me, and it's idle
worrying to think what you'd do if a thing happened that can't
happen," answered the man.  "And now you're here, it will be good for
you to get away from your own vexations for a bit and lend a hand
with mine.  And first I may tell you that I've seen your husband that
was."

"Seen him?  Oh, Jeremy!"

"Keep it dark.  I didn't seek him.  He cornered me and would talk.
Don't think I yielded about it.  Not at all.  I was firm as a rock
with him, because, of course, mother's dead right in that matter; but
there it is.  Jacob Bullstone was very wishful indeed to get into
touch with you, and seemed to think he had a right.  But I hit out
from the shoulder fearlessly, and he heard my honest opinion of him
and so on.  However, I'm a man of the world notwithstanding, and
nobody knows how difficult the world is better than I do.  So up to a
certain point and, well within my conscience, I may do as I'm done by
in the matter."

Margery regarded him with parted lips.

"He wants to see me?"

"I was the last to have speech with him before he was smashed, and
there's no doubt he had a near squeak of his life.  I remember Amelia
Winter telling me years ago, when I was a huckster, that in the case
of Samuel Winter, as a young child, it was a great question whether
he'd turn out amazingly clever, or weak in his head.  Unfortunately
he proved one of the Lord's own, and now, since this business, Adam
feels it a difficult question whether Sammy didn't ought to be put
away.  Why I tell you this is because I'm coming to the point, and
that is our mother's fine rule of life that nothing happens by
chance."

"Go on," said Margery.

"Well, granted nothing happens by chance, then we've got the
satisfaction of knowing we are doing Heaven's will from morning till
night.  Therefore, if you help me in a vital matter and I help you in
a vital matter, we're both doing Heaven's will; and whatever came of
it, mother would be the first to confess it was so."

"Lord, Jeremy!" cried Jane.  "D'you mean to say----"

"I mustn't come into it," explained Jeremy.  "I don't say I'll lift a
hand; but I do say that, if it was established that Jane and I go to
the post-office when the old people retire, I should feel a great
deal clearer in my mind and kinder to the world at large.  It is high
time I had a bit of light on that subject, and I'm a good deal
puzzled the light hasn't shone.  I've been hoping a long time to hear
we was to go in, and so I feel that you might find good and useful
work ready to your hand in that matter, Margery.  And--and one good
turn deserves another.  That's well within a clear conscience."

"A 'good' turn--yes," declared Jane doubtfully.

"It would be a good turn if I decide to help Margery, because we must
all do as the Lord intends, and therefore it couldn't be a bad one,"
explained the casuist.  "In a word, if Margery impressed upon mother
that the right and proper thing was to trust the business and the
post-office to us, that might determine the point.  As a matter of
fact I'm uneasy.  Father's been into Plymouth more than once of late
and, of course, they're looking ahead.  They always do."

"They are," answered Margery, "and I'll tell you something.  Mother
wants you and Jane to take over the business--under father.  And
father, seeing you've never stuck to nothing in your life, feels very
doubtful if you're the man.  They differ."

"Just as I thought," murmured Jeremy, "and some people might be vexed
with their fathers; but that's only to waste time.  So there it is.
You're all powerful with father--eh, Margery?--and surely to God you
know Jane and me well enough to know mother is right."

Margery perceived the nature of the bargain.  She believed with
Jeremy that their father was to be won.  Indeed he sometimes came
near yielding to Judith's steadfast conviction.  She might very
possibly settle the point in her brother's favour; but what could he
do for her?  Nothing with her parents.  The problems that had looked
vague and, indeed, had never been considered in her mind before, now
rose and began to take a definite shape, Until now nothing but a dim,
undefined desire for something that must not be--for something her
parents held unthinkable--had stolen through her mind and settled
over it, like a sad fog.  She had accepted the situation and supposed
that the craving for some return to vanished conditions was at best
weakness, at worst evil.  Yet now she had moved beyond that point to
an acute nostalgia.  Jacob's tribulation was augmented by the
startling news that he desired to see her.  She found comfort in
Jeremy's sophistries, but knew, even while he uttered them in his
mother's words, that they echoed anything but his mother's spirit.
Jeremy was a humbug, as charming people are so apt to be; but the
fact still remained: nothing happened but what Providence planned.

She began to think of details and they made her giddy.  To move from
secret wishes to open words was enough for one day.  She had never
dared to be so explicit, and her confession in the ear of sympathetic
Jane comforted her.  But her constitutional timidity, developed much
of late, now drew her in.

What could Jeremy do?  Deeds were not in Jeremy's line.  Time must
pass.  Jacob must get well again--then, perhaps--she would see how
she felt then.  He might change his mind.  Possibly he only wanted to
mention some trifle.  Margery doubted whether her present emotions
were healthy or dangerous; then she fell back on her brother's
affairs.

"You've given me something to think about; and I will think of it,"
she said.

"And Jeremy shall think of what you've told us," promised Jane, "for
I'll remind him to do so."

"The thing is the greatest good to the greatest number," declared
Jeremy.  "That's always been my rule and always will be.  And clearly
the greatest good to me and my wife and children lies at the
post-office.  Others see it beside us.  As for your greatest good,
Margery--that's a very difficult question."

"I know it.  I hope I haven't said too much; but you'll forgive me if
I have.  I feel--I feel, somehow, that I ought to see my husband, if
he still wishes it."

"You would," answered Jane, "and so would any nice woman feel the
same."

"That's the point," argued Jeremy.  "You may be right, or you may be
wrong.  But the general opinion is that you show what a fine creature
you are by keeping away from him.  Why don't you put it to mother?"

"Put it to a man," advised Jane.  "Ax parson.  It's a free country
and though we're all Chosen Fews, that don't prevent parson from
being a very sensible chap.  Or, if you don't like the thought of
him, try somebody else."

But Margery gave no promise.  She went home vaguely heartened and
determined at least to work for Jeremy.  She felt, indeed, that what
he desired would be sure to happen presently without any word from
her; still to work for him was good.  She had nobody to work for now.

Next morning she went to chapel with Mrs. Huxam and, finding herself
brave afterwards, actually followed Jeremy's suggestion and gave
Judith a shock of unexpected pain.

"Mother," she said.  "I've got great thoughts and you should hear
them.  We can't think anything we're not meant to think, and now my
thoughts have taken a turn.  You know how it was with me.  After our
trouble I didn't want to live; I'd have been glad to shut my eyes and
sleep and never wake up.  Then I got better and braver.  And then I
grew to miss the life of my home terribly, because, whatever the
cause, to be wrenched out of the little holding of your days must
hurt.  And so I got worse again--body and mind.  And now I've looked
on and asked myself about it."

"Better you looked still farther on and put away all that joins you
to the past.  That I've told you more than once, Margery."

"You have; but I can't do it.  You can't forget your whole married
life and your motherhood and the father of your children.  If you do,
there's nothing left for a woman.  And I've come to see this very
clearly.  I'm Jacob's wife."

"No longer in the Lord's sight."

"Let me speak.  I'm Jacob's wife; and what I'm sure now is that Jacob
is a very different man from what he was.  God Almighty has changed
Jacob, and the poison that did these dreadful things is poured out,
and he's left, like the man from whom the devil was drawn by Jesus
Christ.  Mother, when first I even thought about Red House, I felt
shame and dursn't tell you, for I feared the longing to see it again
came from the devil.  Now I don't feel shame, and I know the longing
don't come from the devil.  There's duty to be done there yet."

"Thank God you've told me this," answered Judith, "for we've got to
do some fierce fighting, I fear.  Not the devil?  Why, I see his
claws, Margery!

"'Tis his last and deadliest stroke, to make his temptation look like
duty and come before you clothed like an angel of light.  An old
trick that's snapped many a soul.  Never, never do you hide your
thoughts from me, Margery, after this."

"But wait.  Suppose, by forgiving in act as well as heart, I went
back presently.  Then I might save Jacob himself."

"Oh, the cunning of the Enemy--the craft--the sleepless cleverness!
No, you can't save Jacob Bullstone; but you can lose yourself.
There's always the chance of losing yourself while breath is in your
body, and Lucifer knows it, and he'll often win at the last gasp on a
man's deathbed.  He's proud, remember, and his pride leads him to try
the difficult things.  Can't you see?  How is it so few can see the
net he weaves, while the lotion of the Gospel's at everybody's hand
to wash their eyes clear if they would?  He's vain as a peacock and
likes to do the difficult things and catch the souls in sight of
Heaven's gates.  I know; I read him; not many women have conned over
his ways like I have.  And now he's saying 'Jacob Bullstone is
mine--a gift from his youth up--and there's no cleverness in keeping
your own; but the woman he's cast down is not mine.'  And your soul
would be worth the winning.  And what's cleverer than to make you
think you can save your doomed husband's soul when, to try, would be
to lose your own?  You'd best to pray on your knees about this and
call loudly on your Saviour.  I'm a lot put about to hear of such
dreadful thoughts.  They've crept in through the chinks in the armour
of salvation, Margery, and you must look to it this instant moment."

"There's a human side, mother.  The man has been called to face
death.  He lies there in hospital and----"

"And where did he fling you to lie?  Where was hospital for the ills
you have suffered and the death you have died?  There is a human
side, and to return good for evil is our duty; but there's a higher
duty than that.  Don't argue.  I know all about the human side; but
humanity was never yet called upon to risk its immortality and hope
of salvation.  I'll hear no more touching this at all, Margery.  I'm
suffering for you a good bit.  I've failed to make the truth clear
seemingly."

"No, no, you haven't failed.  I know how you view it."

"Set your trust where only trust can be set," said Mrs. Huxam, "and
trust your God, like a little child, to show you, in His good time,
how your future life's got to go.  And first He wills for you to get
up your health of mind and body.  Your mind before everything.  Your
body's nought; but your mind's sick--far, far sicker than I
thought--and we must see to it.  There's fighting to be done and
we'll fight.  I thought all that was over; but the devil smells a
sick soul, like a cat smells fish, and I might have known there was
danger lurking."

They returned home, to find that somebody had called upon Margery's
mother.  Old William Marydrew awaited them in his Sunday black.

Margery he welcomed kindly, though she responded in doubt; but Mrs.
Huxam, who knew the ancient man for her son-in-law's friend, showed
open suspicion and seemed little inclined to grant the speech he
begged.

"I've no quarrel with you," she said, "and I very well remember your
godly daughter, for Mercy Marydrew had the light; but----"

"The better the day the better the deed," ventured Billy.  "Don't
stand against me till you've heard me.  I don't come from Mr.
Bullstone.  I'm here on my own--for a friendly tell--and I hope
you'll respect my age and give ear to what I'd like to say."

Mr. Huxam, who had been talking to William until his wife's return,
supported the proposition.

"Hear him, Judy," he said.  "Nobody's ever heard nothing from William
that he shouldn't hear, but on the contrary, much that was well worth
hearing.  Wisdom like his, when it's mellow and not turned sour, as
wisdom will with some old folk, be all to the good.  We'll go into
the kitchen and see after dinner and leave you to it."

He departed with Margery, and Mrs. Huxam took off her black thread
gloves and blew her nose.

"Speak then," she said, "and take the easy-chair.  I'm not one to
deny respect and attention to any religious-minded man; but I warn
you that there are some things don't admit of dragging up.  You
understand."

William plunged at once into the great matter of his visit.

"Single-handed I come," he said, "and I wish I was cleverer and
better skilled to bend speech to my purpose; but you must allow for
that.  In a word, there's a general feeling in a good few minds that
Jacob Bullstone is indecent and blameworthy to want his wife to go
back to him; while, against that, in a good few other, well-meaning
minds--women as well as men--there's a feeling it might be a very
decent thing to happen, and wouldn't hasten the end of the world
anyway.  And I, for one, incline to think the same."

"The end of the world's not our business," said Judith, "but the
souls of ourselves and our children and grand-children are our
business.  You strike in on ground where I've just been treading, and
I'm very sorry to hear you can say what you have said.  Whether it's
indecent and blameworthy for Jacob Bullstone to want his wife don't
matter at all.  What those doomed to eternal death want, or don't
want, is nought.  But we've got to think of the living, and we've got
to save the souls that are still open to be saved."

"Certainly; and who, under God, has the right to damn woman, or
child, or man, or mouse, my dear?  I saw Bullstone in hospital
yesterday, and seeing and hearing him, it came over me like a flame
of fire to have a word with you, because well I know you are the
turning point--the angel of life, or death I might say--to these two.
Everything depends upon you seemingly--or so he reckons.  You hold
their future lives in your hand.  That's a lot to say, but not too
much.  And I should much like to hear your point of view on this high
subject.  Bullstone, I must tell you, have suffered a very great
deal, and his eyes are opened to his lunatic act.  He was just as mad
every bit as Sammy Winter, who set the bull on him to mangle him.
Just as mad, my dear; but with a far worse sort of madness; and yet a
madness that can be cured, which Sammy's can't in this world.  And
afore the God we both obey, I tell you that Jacob is cured.  His
sufferings have been all you could wish, and his broken thigh, and so
on, was nothing in comparison.  He's gone through tortures that make
his broken bones no worse than a cut finger; and I want you to
understand that he's long ways different from what he was, Mrs.
Huxam, and an object for good Christian forgiveness all round.  And
now you tell me what you think about it?"

Judith looked, almost with pity, at the ancient prattler.  It seemed
to her that such people as Mr. Marydrew could hardly have more souls
to save, or lose, than a bird on a bough.  They were apparently
innocent and went through the world, like unconscious creatures,
doing neither harm nor good.  But Billy suddenly appeared in harmful
guise.  It was as though an amiable, domestic animal had showed its
teeth, threatened attack and became a danger.

"You're touching subjects a thought too deep for your intellects, Mr.
Marydrew, if you'll excuse me for saying so," she began.

"Don't say that.  I venture to think----"

"You think, but I know.  I know that no man or woman can interfere
between Jacob Bullstone and his Maker, or undo what's done.  For once
even the doubtful sense of the world at large sees it.  A child could
see it.  My daughter has come to the gate of salvation by a bitter
road, like many do.  She's faced great sufferings and escaped awful
perils; but she's through the gate; it's fast home behind her, and
she ain't going to open it again to her death--be sure of that.  He
dares to want to see her, and you say he's changed.  But, after
you've done some things, it's too late to change.  He's lost.  Why?
Because, like a lot of this generation, he's listened to false
teachers and thought the Powers of Evil were growing weak.  To hear
some people, you'd think the devil was no more than a scarecrow set
up to frighten the world into the paths of goodness."

"True," admitted Billy.  "It was so with me.  Looking back I can
plainly see, as a lad, the fear of Old Nick had a lot more to do with
my keeping straight than love of God.  God was above my highest
imaginings.  I only knew He was wishful to get me into Heaven some
day, if I gave Him half a chance.  But the devil seemed much nearer
and much more of a live person.  Somehow you find that bad folk
always are nearer and more alive than good ones--don't you?"

"Because we all know bad people and have every chance to see them
misbehaving," said Mrs. Huxam, "but good people are rare, and always
will be."

"I wouldn't say that.  I'm so hopeful that I rather share the growing
opinion against hell.  I believe the next generation will knock the
bottom out of hell, my dear, because they'll find something better.
There's a lot of things far better than in my youth, and new love be
better than ancient fear.  Grant that and you can't say Jacob's down
and out.  He's a very penitent man, and he's turned to God most
steadfast of late, and it would be a great triumph for the mercy of
God, his Maker, if he came through, and a great sign of the
Almighty's power in human hearts."

She regarded Billy with mild interest, but hardly concealed her
contempt.

"And you in sight of your grave and your judgment, and so wrong in
opinions," she said.  "'A sign?'  Yes.  This generation seeks after a
sign no doubt; and that's an impious thing to do at any time.  And I
dare say the day is not very far off when it will get the sign it
deserves.  D'you know what you're doing, you perilous old man?
You're trying to hold back the mills of God--you, that know so little
of the truth, that you can say the bottom's going to be knocked out
of hell!  I didn't ought to listen, I reckon, for from your own mouth
you've told me you are with the fallen ones, and I never thought the
father of Mercy Marydrew had missed salvation.  But 'tis a very true
thing that most of us are judged out of our mouths.  No devil!  Poor
soul!  Poor, lost soul!  But, such is the will of God, that I see
clearer and clearer how only them that have escaped Satan know him
for what he is.  The world lies in his keeping, and the people don't
know no more what has caught them than the fish in a net.  But I
know.  I see his ways and his awful art.  I see him as he
is--black--black--and you can smell the smeech of him when some
people are talking.  And not the swearers and lewd ones only, but
many, as think, like you, they are doing God's work.  That's the last
and awfulest trick of him, William Marydrew--to make his work look
like God's."

Billy was amused and distracted from the object of his visit.

"My!" he said.  "Blessed if I thought there was anybody in Brent knew
such a lot about Old Nick as you do, Mrs. Huxam.  A proper witch
doctor you be!  But even the saved make mistakes.  'Tis on the cards
you may be wrong, and I hope you are.  You'm terrible high-minded,
but them that want to be high-minded must be single-minded, and the
clever ones often come to grief.  You know a lot too much about the
Black Man, and I'd like to hear who told you.  But be that as it may,
there's a very fine thing called mercy--come now."

"There is," said Mrs. Huxam, "or the bolt would fall a lot oftener
than it does.  Mercy belongs to God, else heaven would be empty when
the Trump sounds; but there's also such a thing as justice, and
justice is man's business.  He can leave mercy where it belongs and
not dare to think of such a thing when a sinner falls.  For that's to
know better than Him that made the sinner.  Justice is what we
understand, because our Maker willed that we should.  Our first
parents had their taste of justice, and justice is within our reach.
To talk of showing mercy to the wicked as you do, is to say a vain
thing and range yourself against justice.  Only through justice can
come hope for any of us, William Marydrew.  Our business is to do
justly and not pander with evil, or try to touch the thing with
merciful hands."

"And that's what life have taught you," murmured Billy.  "And you
thrive and keep pretty well on it.  I've always heard you was a
wonder, my dear, but how wonderful I never did guess.  Now tell me,
is Adam Winter, who be of the Chosen Few, in the right to forgive the
man that did him so much harm, or in the wrong?"

They talked for an hour, then, weary and conscious that Mrs. Huxam
was not made of material familiar to him, William rose and went his
way.

"No offence given where none is taken, I hope.  I'm sorry you can't
see it might be a vitty thing for husband and wife to come together
in fulness of time; because if you can't see it, it won't happen
perhaps.  But turn over the thought, like the good woman you are, and
if the Lord should say that mercy ain't beyond human power, after
all--well, listen."

"You needn't tell me to listen, Mr. Marydrew.  I'm sorry for your
blindness and I'm sorry for your deafness, but I see clear and I hear
clear still."

"Good day then.  No doubt it takes all sorts to make a world."

"Yes," answered she, "but only one sort to make a heaven."

He laughed genially.

"Then I hope they won't knock the bottom out of hell, after all, else
where should us of the common staple go?  Must spend eternity
somewhere."

"Scratch a sinner and the devil always peeps out," thought Mrs. Huxam
as William departed.




CHAPTER VII

AT JACOB'S BEDSIDE

A week later William visited Jacob in hospital.  He was nearing
recovery, but now knew that he might be lame for the rest of his
life.  The sufferer felt indifferent; but he cherished minor
grievances and grumbled to his friend.

"Only Auna ever comes to see me.  Would you believe that?  Not once
has John Henry visited me, and only once, Avis--and her marriage,
that I've agreed to, and the farm that I've given her and all!" he
said.

"Young lovers be selfish toads," explained William; "think nothing of
it.  I believe Avis will prove a better daughter after marriage than
before.  She's the sort will get sweeter with ripeness.  For John
Henry there's no excuse.  I'll talk to him some day and open his
eyes.  But the great truth is that their amazing grandmother be more
to your children than their own parents.  A mystery, Jacob; but the
ways of blood are always a mystery.  The dead will come to live in
their havage[1] and pass on the good and bad qualities alike.  'Tis a
pity Providence don't look to it that only the good be handed down;
because then the breed of men and women would be a lot better by now
than they are; but all qualities are part and parcel, and even
goodness often takes narrowness and coldness of heart along with it."


[1] _Havage_--offspring.


"Margery's heart was never cold."

"But her mother's--her mother's, Jacob!  I may tell you now that I
carried out a little plot in that quarter and went to see Mrs. Huxam
on a Sabbath.  I had in my mind that at my great age and with my
well-known good character, I might influence her; because in a few
other directions I've talked round high-minded people and showed 'em
that, as things are, nought could be hopefuller than for you and your
wife to come together again."

"You meant well as you always do, Billy."

"An Old Testament fashion of woman is your mother-in-law.  The faith
that would move mountains.  It's a good thing that she hasn't got
much power, for she'd use it in a very uncomfortable fashion if she
had.  A great, mournful wonder in the land.  She's like a sloe-bush,
Jacob: the older she grows, the sharper her thorns and the poorer her
fruit.  I came away with my tail between my legs, I assure you.  I
was dust in the wind afore her."

"She'll never change."

"Never.  Wild horses wouldn't make her change.  Hell comforts her,
same as heaven comforts us, and there's no fear the fires would go
out if she had the stoking."

"The littleness of her--the littleness of her!" cried Jacob.  "Can't
she see that all this talk is nothing to tortured flesh and blood?
Her power lies in the weakness and ignorance of other people.  Hear
this, William: my wife would see me and listen to me, if her mother
allowed it.  And when I know that--to Auna she whispered it--in a
weak moment--still Auna heard--and when I know that, what's hell or
heaven to me?  They must be nothing, anyway, to a man who has done
what I've done--to a man who has brought such sorrow on the earth as
I have.  What is eternity to one who's wasted all his time?  The
things I might have done--the happiness I might have given--the good
I might have wrought!  Instead, I break the heart of the best, truest
woman ever a man had for wife.  What can alter that?  Can eternity
alter it?  Can heaven make it better, or hell make it worse?  Nothing
can change it but what happens here--here--before it's too late.  And
Judith Huxam is going to confound all--just that one, old woman,
poisoned by religion, as much as I was poisoned by jealousy."

"A very great thought, Jacob," admitted Mr. Marydrew.  "We be in the
hand of principalities and powers, and mystery hides our way, look
where we will.  But we must trust.  Everything is on the move, and
the Lord can touch the hardest heart."

"Hearts are nothing, William.  The head governs the world, and great,
blind forces govern the head.  Blind forces, driving on, driving over
us, like the wheel over the mole by night; and despite our wits and
our power of planning and looking ahead and counting the cost, we
can't withstand them.  They run over us all."

"We can't withstand 'em; but the God who made 'em can," answered
William.  "Be patient still and trust the turn of the lane.  You be
paying the wages of your sin, Jacob; you be paying 'em very steady
and regular; and I hope that a time will come when you'll be held to
have paid in full.  We never know how much, or how little our Maker
calls us to pay for our mistakes.  You may have very near rubbed off
the score by God's mercy; for He's well known for a very generous
creditor and never axes any man to pay beyond his powers."

He chattered on and, from time to time, patted Jacob's big hand, that
lay on the counterpane of his bed.

The sick man thanked him presently and then there came Peter, to see
his father on business.  He asked after Jacob's health and expressed
satisfaction to know that he was making progress.  Having received
necessary instructions, he went his way and William praised him.

"There's more humanity in Peter than there is in my eldest," admitted
Peter's father.

He grew calmer before Billy left him and promised to keep his soul in
patience.

"First thing you've got to do is to get well and up on your legs
again against the wedding," urged William.

"I hope much from it," answered Jacob.  "I'm planning to beg Barlow
Huxam to see me on the subject.  That's reasonable--eh?"

"Very reasonable indeed.  He's one with a good deal of sense to him.
In fact the man as have lived all his life with your mother-in-law
must have qualities out of the common," declared William.  "But he
haven't neighboured with that amazing character all these years for
nothing.  How much of his soul he calls his own, you may know better
than me.  'Tis a case of Aaron's rod swallowing the lesser, and he
won't gainsay Mrs. Huxam in anything, I'm afraid."

When he was gone, one thought of a comforting character remained with
the sick man.  He had been much daunted with the tremendous moral
significance of the opinion of the world and its crushing censure.
It had weakened resolution and increased his self-condemnation.  Now
his friend was able to assert that public emotion grew quieter
against him; that even, in some quarters, he had won an admission it
might be reasonable for husband and wife to come together again.
This fact soothed Bullstone, for like many, who do not court their
fellow-creatures, he had been, none the less, sensitive of their
opinions and jealous of their approval.  Herein, therefore, appeared
hope.  He felt grateful to his old companion, who, among so many
words that to Jacob meant no comfort, was yet able to drop this
salutary consolation.  He much desired to tell Auna, who had long
been the recipient of all his confidences and made older than her
years by them.




CHAPTER VIII

JEREMY EVASIVE

After Margery knew her husband's desires, she was animated fitfully
to make an effort and return.  But she lacked strength to do any such
thing single-handed.  She had been losing vitality, yet so gradually,
that none about her appeared conscious of the fact.  Even Auna saw
her too often to appreciate it.  The girl came every week, but won no
further opportunity to see her mother alone.  She opposed a sulky
obstinacy to her grandmother and Judith began to fear for her.

Then Margery saw her brother again and, with even less reticence than
on a former occasion, appealed to him.  She had kept her original
contract and succeeded in winning her father.  It was understood that
Jeremy and Jane would take over the post-office and the draper's
shop, when the Huxams went to their private house; and Jeremy, now
accustomed to the idea, argued that his sister had really not
influenced the decision and that she might not, therefore, fairly ask
him to assist her present project.  In fact he much desired to be off
the bargain, and but for Jane, would have evaded it.  She showed him,
however, that this might not honourably be done and, with very ill
grace, Margery's brother listened to her purpose.

"I must go back when he does," explained Jacob's wife.  "He's made a
good recovery, and can walk on crutches, and will soon be able to
travel with a stick.  And the next thing will be the wedding, I
suppose; and I ought to be at my home for that.  Because such a thing
will break the ice and help all round--at least so I feel and hope.
I must go back, Jeremy.  I'm called stronger and stronger to it, and
mother's awful ideas don't trouble me no more.  I've gone much
farther than to forgive Jacob now.  He's been very near death and I
ask myself what I'd have felt.  But all that's my business.  What I
beg from you, Jeremy, is just practical help--to meet me by night
with your trap, unbeknownst to any living thing but ourselves, and
drive me back."

"I don't like it--I hate it," he answered.  "It's not a religious
action and I'm very doubtful indeed if it's a wise one even from a
worldly point of view.  The excitement will certainly be terrible bad
for you, because you're in no state at all to stand it."

"It may be kill or cure; but I'd far rather face it than go on like
this--seeing my bones come through my skin and my hair fail me.
It'll soon be now or never; but I do think, if I get back quietly and
quickly, I'll build up again and be some good to my family.  I'm only
sorry for mother."

Jeremy exploited the ethical objections.

"You see, Margery, it's quite as difficult for me as for you.  As a
matter of fact you're putting a great charge on my conscience,
because I've got to go contrary to mother and behind her back--a
thing I've never yet done--and feeling as I do that she is right----"

"You've promised," interrupted Jane.  "You promised to lend Margery a
hand if she helped you; and she did help you.  And it's humbug to say
you never hid anything behind your mother's back, my dear man.  What
about it when you married me?"

"I'm talking to Margery, not you," he replied, "and I was going to
say that somebody else might help her in the details much better than
I could.  You see some think she's right, and such as them would do
this with a much better appetite than I shall.  How if I was to drop
a hint and get another man to do it, Margery?  It would be just the
same to you and a good bit pleasanter for me."

"There's nobody but you," she answered, "and it's properly unkind if
you're going back on your promise."

"He isn't," declared Jane with diplomacy.  "He's a lot too fearless
and a lot too good a brother for that."

"I wouldn't say I promised; but of course if you feel I did----"
continued Jeremy.  "However I've got rather a bright idea, and since
you're firm about this, and nobody will thank God better than your
husband if you do go back, then why not let him do it?  That would be
a natural seemly arrangement since you both think alike.  I'm
perfectly willing to go to him and tell him."

"No," said Margery.  "That would upset everything I've planned.  My
return must be a surprise for a thousand reasons.  I want to go back
as I came out.  In plain words, I've got to escape mother to go at
all.  Set like steel as she is against any truck with Jacob, I have
no choice but to deceive her.  I'm too weak to carry it off with a
high hand, and she'd stop me if she guessed I was thinking of it.
Only I can't, of course, walk to Red House, and so I must be drove;
and you must drive me."

"If you're a man, you will, Jeremy," added Jane.  "You promised."

"I bargain, then, that my part never comes out," said Jeremy, much
perturbed.  "I consider this is something of a trap I'm in, and I
don't think much the better of you for it, Margery.  And I believe
you're courting a pack of trouble, not to speak of Everlasting
punishment if you go back to such a man.  But since you won't let me
out, I'll do as you wish on the one understanding, that my name's
never whispered."

Neither Margery nor Jane, however, felt any sorrow for Jeremy.

"Thank you, then," said his sister.  "It's only a question of waiting
now till my husband's well enough to go home.  Then you can fix up a
night, and I'll husband my strength and come and meet you at Lydia
Bridge, or somewhere out of the way.  We might do better to go round
under Brent Tor."

"We must leave the details for the present," said Jeremy, "and it
will be needful to wait till the nights are longer and darker."

Jane changed the subject.

"What about Avis and Bob?" she asked.  "Jacob counts on their wedding
taking place from Red House--so Mr. Marydrew told me."

"It's going to be a difficult subject," answered Margery; "everything
must be difficult till we begin again; and mother won't do anything
to make it less difficult."

"Jacob naturally expects his daughter to be married from her
home--and why not?" asked Jane.

"Because it isn't her home," explained Jeremy.  "You can't talk of
Red House being a home no longer, and mother's right there.  Red
House ceased to be a home when Margery left it."

"But if I was back that would be altered," declared Margery.  "It all
points to my going back.  And mother will live to see it was right,
if only for our children's sakes."

Jeremy, however, would not allow this.

"Don't fox yourself to think so.  Your children haven't any use for
their father and never will have.  He's done for himself with
them--all but Auna--and when she's old enough to see the sense of it,
no doubt she will."

"Jeremy's right," said Jane.  "You mustn't think that, Margery.  The
boys and Avis always did care a lot more for you than their father.
They never hit it, and you knew it, if Jacob did not."

"He knew it very well; but it didn't alter his feeling for them.
He'll do the right thing by all of them, however they treat him,"
argued the other.

"You may think so, but John Henry's a great fool for turning his
father down as he does all the same," declared her brother.  "The
man's not made of patience, and as to justice, the less we say about
justice the better, when we think of you and look at you now."

"I've told John Henry to see his father; I've told him half a dozen
times on the quiet," said Margery.  "For his own sake he should."


Elsewhere, by a coincidence, this very thing that they desired was
happening, for John Henry had met Jacob's ancient friend and been
firmly directed to pay his injured parent a visit.  He obeyed, being
the more inclined to do so for private ends; and while Bullstone
first felt satisfaction at the visit, his pleasure presently waned,
since it became apparent that not concern for his father alone had
brought John Henry.

He hoped that Jacob was better; but this was not what interested him.

"'Tis a very good thing you weren't killed," he said, "and I expect
you'll have the law of that lunatic and win this time.  He didn't
ought to be at large, for he's cunning and wicked.  He may do
something like this again and bring it off next time."

"I've gone through all that with Adam Winter, his brother.  You
needn't trouble on that score.  It's all part and parcel of other
things, and there's no fear that Samuel would assault anybody but me.
I've told his brother that I won't take any step in the matter, or
have him put away.  He's not the only one who has been revenged
against me, John Henry.  At any rate he did it openly."