"If you see it so bitter clear, perhaps you could alter it," she said.

"No, no.  We can't alter it.  I can't be different; you can't be
different.  It would only be pretending to alter, and pretence could
bring no content to either of us.  But time--time may make us
different.  We'll grow numb as we grow old."

Margery was indignant.  She restrained tears with difficulty.

"I've prayed for a lot of things," she said.  "I never thought to
pray to grow old."

"Changes are coming," he replied.  "The children will go out into the
world."

"Then perhaps you'll have a little of the peace you thirst for."

"I'm too selfish ever to get peace," he replied.  "That's the crux
and curse of loving a woman as I've loved you.  Love and peace can't
walk together.  You don't understand that.  No matter.  It only means
that if half of you is getting what it wants, then the other half
cannot.  The knot is there.  We can't be happy together, and it's
still more certain I can't be happy apart.  But you could.  That's
the difference."

"And you think I might be happy, knowing you weren't?  Why d'you say
that?  What have I done to sink below you in love?"

"I don't know--I wish I did," he answered.

"And you spend your whole life trying to find out," she retorted.
"And so you waste your life, because there's nothing to find out."

Occasionally, in moments of indignation, she had accused him thus
before; and now that happened which had previously happened on such
challenges.  He said not another word.

At the kennels he stopped and turned away, while she followed her
children to the house.




CHAPTER VII

SUNDAY

John Henry, Avis and their mother had come on a Sunday, to drink tea
with Margery's parents and go to chapel afterwards.

There was trouble in the air; indeed Mr. Huxam, who happened to be
ailing, declared that he never remembered so many problems demanding
solution at one time.  When he was indisposed, he always dwelt on the
blessings of retirement and declared that the 'villa residence' he
designed to build for his declining years should now be erected.

"I feel it borne in upon me very much of late that we ought to
begin," he told Margery, and she agreed with him.

"Jacob's always saying you should start.  Not a week ago he was
telling me that his bit of land on the north side of the railway
ought to suit you down to the ground."

"I've let the chance slip," declared Barlow, coughing and patting his
chest.  "If I'd been awake, I should have purchased a site ten years
ago; but what with one thing and another--chiefly Jeremy--I never
seemed to have the necessary dollop of money."

"It wasn't that," argued Mrs. Huxam.  "Jeremy, though he hasn't found
the exact work yet, can't be said to have cost much in money, if he
has in thought.  I always warned against looking too far ahead
touching the villa residence.  But now I do think the time has come."

"'Peace with honour' is what you and me have a right to," answered
Barlow, "and if Jacob, among his possessions down this way, has got
an acre or thereabout, to please your mother, Margery, so much the
better.  I want to see the house started."

"Jeremy's really going," Margery told them; but it was no news.
Indeed his mother knew more than she.

"I won't speak about the past," she began, "though I haven't heard
anybody say that Jeremy failed as huckster, or Jane to market.  But
now, with a family on the way, the circumstances are changed.  So
like as not Jeremy will come into Brent and take over Michael Catts'
little business--the green-grocer's."

"Leave Owley Cot?"

"Yes.  It hasn't suited him too well and he's a good bit cut off from
religion up there."

"What changes!" murmured Margery.  "Jacob says that Joe Elvin is
going down hill rather quick.  His health's giving out.  In fact
Jacob's beginning to look round already for a new tenant, if it must
be.  Just now we've got distemper in the kennels and he's lost some
valuable young dogs."

"I hope he's taking it in a Christian spirit then," answered Judith.
"He's had an amazing deal of good fortune in his time, by the will of
God, and such men are often a great disappointment under affliction."

"He's vexed, of course, but he doesn't whine about it.  You'll never
see him cry out if he's hurt."

"His steady luck has not hurt Jacob, as luck is apt to do," said
Barlow.  "He keeps an even front."

"But he's not sound and commits himself to a very doubtful thought
sometimes," replied Mrs. Huxam.  "A jealous God reads every heart,
Margery, and won't suffer no looseness in matters of doctrine."

"He does nothing but good--a very honourable and upright man, and
more than that," said Margery.  "You must be all right if you make
the world happier than you find it."

"It is your place to stand up for him," returned Judith, "and, in
reason, a wife ought to say the best she knows of her husband; but
actions may spring from all sorts of motives.  Good actions may arise
from bad motives, owing to the ignorance and also the devious cunning
of men and women.  All we've got to cling to is the Light, and if a
man shows the Light doubtfully, then, however he may seem to shine,
we can't be sure of him."

Margery had concealed from her parents the gap that existed in
understanding between Jacob and herself.  Her father cordially
approved of him; her mother had ever expressed herself as uncertain.
Now her daughter declared surprise at this fact.

"I've always got to champion Jacob against you," she said.  "But I
should have thought you'd have been the first to see his qualities.
He's like you in a way--don't care for pleasure, or company, and
keeps a guard over his lips, and works morning, noon and night.  If
Jeremy had been like that----"

Mrs. Huxam was not annoyed.

"You can't see all round the human character as I can, Margery," she
answered, "and I don't blame you, because such a bird's-eye view only
comes with years, and between husband and wife it often never comes
at all.  What the deep eye looks to is the foundations.  In Jeremy's
case I laid the foundation, being my work as his mother.  And in your
case I laid the foundation also.  Jeremy has a character that you
might call weak, and without religion he would very likely have
brought our grey hairs with sorrow to the grave--if I was that sort
of woman, which I am not.  But the foundation is there, and as for
the building, though it ain't very grand to the eye yet, that's the
Lord's business.  Jacob puts up a finer show, being a man with
money-making gifts and experience; but where the foundations are
doubtful, who can say what may happen if a shock comes?"

"I wouldn't call his foundations doubtful," answered Margery.  "I
should say his foundations were the strongest part about him.  Not
that I've ever seen them.  Nobody has.  Jeremy, for all his weakness
and instinct for change, gets more out of life than Jacob.  Jacob
misses a lot by his nature."

"If he misses anything that he'd be the better for having, be sure
there's a reason," asserted Judith.  "Haven't I seen it thousands of
times?  Don't ninety-nine men and women out of a hundred miss a lot,
just because the one thing needful--the absolute trust and certainty
that all is for the best--be denied them?"

"He doesn't grant that all's for the best, because he doesn't think
or feel so," answered Margery.

"There you are then!  That's weak faith.  That's what I'm telling
you.  The man who pits his opinions against God and doubts of the
righteous fate of the world is next door to a lost man himself."

"He's talked of these things," answered Jacob's wife, "for I've
challenged him sometimes and said how I believe, with you, that
nothing happens that's not ordained to happen.  But he won't grant
that.  He holds much evil happens that we might escape, if men were
wiser and more patient and reasonable.  He's great on reason."

"I'm sorry to hear it," replied Judith.  "Reason is well known for a
very faulty shift and the play-ground of the devil.  Reason don't
save no souls, but it damns a parlous number, and I wish I could feel
a lot surer than I do where Jacob will spend his eternity."

Margery was not moved at this dreadful suspicion.

"Goodness is goodness and can't be badness," she said, "and goodness
is rewarded.  Jacob says religion can't alter your instincts, or your
nature; and if you're the fidgety, anxious sort, belief in the
Almighty won't make you less so.  You may know perfectly well that
you ought to trust, like a lamb trusts its mother; but Jacob says you
can't always keep your mind fixed on God, when it's full to bursting
with a wife and children.  I know what he means well enough."

"Do you?  Then I'm cruel sorry to hear it," answered Judith, who was
much perturbed.  "What's religion for but to alter your instincts and
your wretched nature?  If I thought that man was weakening your faith
by a hair's breadth, or casting the shadow of danger over your soul,
I'd call upon you on my knees to leave him."

Then Barlow spoke, calmed his wife and endeavoured to lighten the
gravity of the conversation.

"Let it be, Judy, and use your brains," he began.  "We all very well
know what a difficult thing it is to say what we mean, for words beat
their makers, time and again, and half the trouble in the world, so
parson tells me, was begot at Babel.  And I doubt not that what
Margery says Jacob told her, wasn't exactly what Jacob thought he'd
told her.  Plain mouth-speech is a very hard thing to reach, and if
we, who keep a shop, don't know it, who should?"

"He's very sparing of words at all times," added Margery.

"Jacob," continued Barlow, "is hard in some things and silly soft in
others.  But every man that was ever born does silly things in a
woman's opinion, off and on.  And women have got their own
silliness--to the male's eye.  Not you, Judith, but the race in
general.  Women drive men wild sometimes, and we drive them wild.
The difference is that generally they tell us if we disagree with
them, and we ain't so open."

"That's true," admitted Margery.  "And nought, I'm sure, vexes a
woman more than to know she's going wrong and not be told how."

When Judith had gone to put on her bonnet for chapel, Margery
returned to the subject of the villa residence and cheered her father
up.

"I want to see you lay the foundation brick," she said, "and I hope
you will start next spring if not sooner.  It's high time you and
mother slacked off."

"It is," he answered, "and I can see myself doing it; but I can't see
her."

Avis and John Henry returned at this hour and presently, leaving Mr.
Huxam behind to take care of his chest, they proceeded to the temple
of the Chosen Few.  Jeremy appeared with Jane, and Adam Winter and
his aunt were also among the small congregation.  Margery felt glad
to see Miss Winter, for she now liked better to speak with Adam when
another was present.  For pride, she had not mentioned past events to
him, and the man guessed not that he had ever won a harsh word or
thought from Margery's husband behind his back.

There was a measure of truth in Barlow Huxam's argument, for
Bullstone sometimes missed conveying the warmth he felt, from
frugality of spoken words.  His deeds atoned in the judgment of most
men and women, since speech conveys no special unction to bucolic
minds.  It is only the urban populations, fed from youth upon the
newspaper, that are so easily hoodwinked by volubility.

Leaving her mother refreshed by devotion, Margery joined Amelia
Winter on the homeward tramp to Shipley, Adam asked after the illness
in the kennels and expressed regret at it.  Then Margery inquired for
Sammy, who had cut his leg when mowing fern.

"He's all right," answered Samuel's aunt; "but him being laid by for
ten days opened our eyes to his usefulness, didn't it, Adam?  Take
the bull alone.  'Turk' is a queer-tempered party, and nobody else
will dare face him; but along with Sammy he's a proper lamb.  My
nephew orders him about like as if he was a dog, and will even dare
to hit him over the nose if he's cranky."

"A very queer truth," admitted Adam.  "There's something in Samuel
that gets over 'Turk.'  They understand each other.  We're going to
show the bull at Brent Fair presently, and if he falls short of a
prize, I don't know what my brother will do--talk to the judges I
expect!"

The famous Pony Fair was near at hand and, on the occasion of this
annual revel, not only ponies, but sheep and cattle came to Brent.

"No chance of your master going to the revel I suppose?" asked Adam.
"Never shows himself at such times."

"I wish he did," answered Margery.  "I'm always on at him to have a
bit of fun when it offers, which isn't often.  But pleasuring's pain
to him."

"Get's his pleasure different.  I met Benny up over, and he says when
he's off next year, Mr. Bullstone will very like take on
Huntingdon--for his health."

"For his mind's health," answered she, not sorry to breathe her
grievance.  "He's such a lover of peace that he feels a day or two up
there sometimes--beyond sight and sound of his fellow-creatures and
the fret of his family--would do his tormented mind a lot of good."

"Fancy!  'The fret of his family'--eh?  Takes every sort to make a
world, no doubt, and the sort that knows its own luck is the rarest
of all."

"I understand, though I don't share, his feeling," explained Margery,
who instantly supported Jacob when any other questioned his manner of
life.  "It's the contrast from the racket and din of home.  You're a
bachelor and seem like to stop one, so you don't know and never will
know what a noisy, bustling house with childer in it exactly means.
But to a thinker, like Jacob, there comes a craving to get out of
reach of real life sometimes.  A spell of silence and his own company
always put him in a good mood.  He'll go off for the day when he can,
on some pretext, but I know it means a day of solitude.  Solitude
doesn't mean loneliness to him.  It's a craving, like some men crave
for drink."

"You're not the same though?"

"Not I.  I love company and pleasant faces and the news.  I shall be
at the fair with my children."

"I'm fond of a rally myself.  You'll drop on very nice people at them
times--folk you only see once a year, very like, and yet are glad to
call friends.  Pony Fair's a great place for meeting such.  Sammy's
for it, too, though you wouldn't think so.  And never takes a drop
too much, if he's got animals to look after.  So I always see that he
has.  But if he's a free man with no responsibility, then he'll let
himself go and get blind in no time."

Elsewhere the children discussed a more serious subject.  They had
heard a stern discourse and considered it.

"I can stand hell better in cold weather than hot," said John Henry.
"Makes you sweat in the summer, but warms you when it's frosty."

"You didn't ought to say that, did he, Miss Winter?" asked Avis; then
she explained John Henry's view to Amelia.

"Let hell alone," answered the old woman.  "Remember there is such a
place and just keep it at the back of your mind--same as we always
keep a kitchen at the back of the house.  Heaven's your eternal home
well hope.  Be you going to the revel?"

"All of us but father," said Avis.  "He won't go, but mother's taking
us."

"You'll have a nice swing in the 'roundabouts' I expect."

"I shan't," said John Henry.  "I'm going to learn about the cattle;
so's Robert Elvin from Owley.  He's older than me, but he don't know
a bit more about farming than what I do, though he's been at it near
two year."

"Don't you puff yourself up, John Henry," warned Amelia.  "You hear
my nephew, Mr. Winter.  He's been a farmer for five and twenty years,
and yet he'll tell you there's always more and more to learn."

"That's one for you, John Henry," said Avis.

The boy considered what to reply.  He suffered reproof from men, but
hated it from women.

"I only said that Bob Elvin didn't know more than me.  I didn't puff
myself up," he answered, "and if I've still got a lot to know when
I'm so old as Mr. Winter, then I shan't be much of a farmer."

"Time and human wisdom don't stand still," explained Amelia.
"There's always a lot left to know about everything, because larning
increases and new-fangled things are always coming to the top.  I
dare say pigs will fly some day.  If you ever catch yourself thinking
you know all there is to farming, John Henry, then you'll do very
well to be frightened, for that'll mean you're going to get left."

"I ain't afeared I'll get left, Miss Winter," he answered stoutly.

The fair continued to be matter for general conversation.  Amelia
alone was not going.

"Too old," she said.  "Half the pleasure of a revel be to know you
ain't coming home to an empty house and the fire out."

"You'd better keep Jacob company," advised Margery.  "I'm always
wanting him to find new friends, because the old ones drop off so."

"There's no doubt Jacob's first friend is that ancient man, Billy
Marydrew.  And a very companionable, cheerful old bird he is.  But
he's up home eighty, I believe, and have got to go pretty soon,"
replied Adam.

"Yes," admitted Margery.  "He's my husband's dearest friend, I do
think--except one.  Funny he should have one at both ends of life."

"The other being?" asked Adam.

"Why, his own youngest--Auna."

"And a very dear, dinky child to have for a friend," admitted Amelia
Winter.  "But in my experience it ban't wise for a man to fasten on
his darter, specially if she's going to grow into a pretty woman
before you can look round; for then comes love and good-bye.  A maid
shares her heart with her father only till the lover comes."

They parted at the gate of Shipley Farm and Margery followed her boy
and girl, who had run forward.  It was dusk and still.  Already the
owls hooted from the fir wood.




CHAPTER VIII

THE REVEL

Morning broke in misty promise on the day of the Pony Fair, and
Samuel Winter was first to set forth from Shipley.  He had been up
since light making the great bull's toilet, and now man and beast
tramped together through a meadow in the valley, where was a field
path that shortened the journey to Brent.  'Turk,' in his lordly
prime, strode through the white meadow mist behind Samuel, who led
him by a rope attached to a ring in his nose.  The great red 'Devon'
had curls on his forehead, short, stubby horns and a broad back, as
flat as a table from shoulder-blade to haunch.  He was in grand
fettle, and Samuel, too, looked transformed from the slouch of every
day.  He wore his best clothes, a new, hard hat and a blue tie--his
last birthday present from his aunt.  Yellow leggings completed
Sammy's attire and he puffed a pipe, sending smoke into the cold,
morning air, while Turk snorted warm, sweet breath, that turned to
steam.

John Henry and Peter were the first to start from Red House.  Indeed
they overtook Samuel and joined the procession of the bull.

At a later hour Margery, Avis and Auna drove off in a trap together,
and they passed Adam Winter on foot, also journeying to Brent for the
day.

Jacob made it clear that he should not visit the township, or the
fair.  He was going to Owley, to see Joe Elvin, and might then ride
further.  Margery begged him to reconsider his determination and join
her presently; but he could not undertake an enterprise so
distasteful.

"I shall hear all about it afterwards," he said.

He ate his dinner alone and then rode out, stopping a moment to see
Mr. Marydrew.  William was just emerging from his cottage gate,
dressed for the revel.

"How's the distemper?" he asked.

"Got it under.  It will be past in ten days.  The trouble has taught
me something and made me think better of my son, Peter.  Good pluck
and good sense there, Billy."

"I told you what was hid in that boy."

"Off to the fair, I see."

"Yes, faith.  Not many more junkettings in store for me.  And,
finding the day so brave, I felt up for anything.  Josh Peatheyjohns
is going to give me a lift from his corner."

"And what do you get out of this racket and noise, and crush of
beasts and humans?" asked Jacob.

Billy laughed.

"What do I get out of it?  Well, I get pleasure out of it--an old
man's pleasure.  First there's the pleasure of following custom and
doing, yet again, what I've done more than fifty years already.  And
to be well enough to go at all is a pleasure in itself.  Then there's
the old faces and funny customers I've known when we were boys--a
good few yet.  And then there's the sight of the young; because if
you can't have a good time yourself, the next best thing is to see
somebody else having a good time.  And to watch the young enjoying
themselves and doing all the same things we did, brings back the past
in a cheerful sort of way."

"I'm answered, then," replied Jacob, "and it's a good advertisement
for your pleasures, Billy, that you can live them over again in
others.  When I'm old, there will be nothing like that for me."

"You're too old for your age as it is," answered the elder.  "There's
nought makes a man grow old before his time like brooding and
over-much thought.  Solitude throws you in on your own nature, Jacob,
and a man's own nature ain't always the best company for him."

"That's true enough."

"On an annual great day like this, nobody did ought to turn his back
on his neighbours, but go amongst 'em in a spirit of good-will and
charity.  A gathering of jolly souls is good for the heart, because
you're drove out of yourself, and hear other opinions, and rub off
the rust of the mind."

He chattered till Josh Peatheyjohns and his market cart appeared in
the road ahead.

"Come on, grandfather!" shouted the farmer, and soon Billy was borne
away, while Jacob rode his horse through the autumnal lanes.  He
passed Bullstone Farm, but did not enter; then he descended to Glaze
Brook, where the ancient pear tree stood, more ghostly than ever in
its cerecloth of grey lichens; and then he climbed to Owley.

Robert Elvin had already gone to the fair, with two ponies and a
dozen ewe lambs to sell.  His mother and father were at home, and
Jacob, tethering his horse, knocked at the door.  Mrs. Elvin admitted
him and he soon sat beside the sick farmer.  Joe suffered from
paralysis and was now bed-ridden.  He took his troubles ill and
seemed not very grateful for Bullstone's call.  His wife was weary
and worn.  She confessed, as she saw the visitor to his horse an hour
later, that it would be a great blessing when it pleased the Lord to
remove her husband; and she uttered a hope that Jacob would not feel
her son too young to carry on.

"Bob's a man in all but years," she said, "and you can trust him, as
Joe has trusted him ever since he was struck down."

But Bullstone made no promises.  He condoled with the wife and agreed
that her husband could not go too soon, since his life was a burden
to him and all brought in contact with him.  He praised Robert, who
was favourably known, and, after leaving Owley, rode round the farm
and satisfied himself that no neglect appeared.  He then called on
Jane Huxam at Owley Cot and heard that Jeremy had gone to the fair.
Jane was packing and she declared herself very sorry to depart.

"The green-grocer's is likely to suit my husband best, however," she
said, "because the brightest of him, which is his manners, is thrown
away as a huckster.  He's a born shopman and he'll be nearer his
parents, which will be a comfort.  Yes, there's dilapidations,
Jacob--I see your eyes roaming round; but nothing to name; and when
Margery was here backalong, she granted I'd took very good care of
the garden."

"Where are you going to live?" he asked.

"Over the shop.  It's smaller than this nice house, of course, and no
beautiful garden.  We can't expect that; but it's in a good part of
Brent as you know, and but two minutes from the post-office."

Jacob grunted.

"Jeremy's thrown away the best chance he's ever likely to get."

"I hope not.  He's not much of an open air man really--specially in
winter.  His gifts shine indoors.  And he was wondering if you'd want
the hoss and trap back, as unfortunately we've never been able to pay
for 'em, or whether you'd be so exceeding brotherly and generous as
to let him have them still--for the green-grocery.  Of course it
would be a godsend if you could; and, if all goes so well as we
expect, he ought to be able to pay you back with interest in a year I
shouldn't wonder."

"You're hopeful," said Jacob.  "A good thing that he married a
hopeful pattern of woman."

"And every right to hope," she answered.  "Jeremy's no common man.
If he was a shopwalker in a big business, he'd be worth thousands to
it.  In fact he's one of those who are likely to be worth a lot more
to somebody else than himself."

"As long as you're satisfied, Jane---"

"Well satisfied," she said.

He looked at the baby--a boy.

"Teach your little one to know his own mind; and don't let him be
brought up like a feather in a gale of wind."

"If he's half the man his father is, there'll be no call to quarrel
with him," said Jane.  "He's going to be like his father outwardly,
and his grandmother sees the promise of character already."

"You'll be close to her at Brent, my dear."

Jane was cautious.

"We shall--parlous close; and as an 'in-law' to Mrs. Huxam, Jacob,
same as me, you go in a bit of fear, too, no doubt?"

"Not I."

"Well, you're older and powerfuller than me, of course.  But she's
got a weak spot, which you haven't found out and I have.  Jeremy's
her weak spot, thank God.  She sees what a man he really is under his
bad luck, and he'll never go scat really--not while she's above
ground.  She feels to Jeremy same as Mr. Huxam feels to your wife.
And I dare say you've gained by that sometimes."

"I didn't know that Barlow Huxam is specially set on Margery," he
answered.

"Oh, yes, he is," said Jane.  "So they're both safe, and both will be
snug sooner or late.  Of course that don't matter to a rich man like
you; but it's a comforting thought for me.  Those the Lord loveth, He
chasteneth--so Mrs. Huxam says; but anybody can weather a few storms
if he knows he'll be safe in port sooner or late."

With this nautical simile, Jacob left Jane to continue her packing.
And then, as he turned his horse's head for home, a sudden whim took
him and--why he could not have explained to himself--he decided to go
to Brent and look upon the fair.  Thinking back in years to come, he
dated a very perceptible increase of his soul's sickness from that
day.  It was a disease of an intermittent sort, masked sometimes by
circumstance, drugged sometimes by the passage of events; but
fitfully it progressed, punctuated by incidents; and from the day of
the Pony Fair, it always seemed to the man that his ailment grew,
until it blotted clean thinking and, by its progress, so weakened
reason that the end came before its time, but not before he was
sapped and riddled with the poison.  He knew also, that but for the
act of chance and the hazards of his well-protected life, the venom
might have remained immune within his nature for ever.  But the
accidents of existence offered a seed bed, and the thing increased
until a climax inexorable swept away the foundations of his ordered
days and left him to the challenge of the ruins.

Cloud banks already ascended over the horizon southerly as the sun
sank upon Ugborough Beacon; but weather could not now defeat the day,
or lessen its triumph.  A very successful fair had rewarded local
effort.  Prices were good and the ponies brought a harvest to their
owners.  Crowds wandered over the enclosures, and the last
competition, for driving hacks, was in progress at four of the
afternoon.  Jeremy and his father were watching it, with Avis and
Robert Elvin, who had sold his stock to satisfy himself.  Then the
boy and girl drifted away together and Robert entertained her at
various stalls, where sweetmeats and trumpery were being sold.  They
listened to Cheap Jack, and presently Robert invited Avis to have her
fortune told by a green-and-yellow parrokeet.  He paid sixpence out
of five shillings of his private savings, and an Italian woman set
her little bird about its task.  It plucked a grubby card, and Avis
learned she would marry a dark, handsome man with plenty of money.

"I hope that will come true," said Robert.

"Now see your luck," urged Avis; but Bob was not going to spend
another sixpence in this fashion.

"Your luck might be mine," he murmured, and Avis, who thought well of
the youth, made no comment.  She was sixteen now and Robert eighteen.

Sammy Winter stood, a grotesque and gloomy figure, thrusting up
between 'Turk' and another bull.  He wore a blue rosette in his hat;
but it represented the second prize and gave Sammy no pleasure
whatever.  He protested and growled to all who would listen; and if
looks could have slain 'Turk's' conqueror, the monster must swiftly
have perished.

'Turk' was lying down and chewing the cud, indifferent to his
moderate honours; while his guardian talked to Billy Marydrew and
explained the iniquity of the decision.

"Never mind, my dear," said Billy.  "Us can't all be first.  Your
turn next.  'Turk's' young yet.  He'll have plenty more chances, but
the winner's past his prime."

Mr. Marydrew wore a little flag in his buttonhole and a little
worsted and wire monkey stuck in the brim of his hat.  Thus he echoed
the spirit of the hour and ambled cheerfully about with a friend or
two.

John Henry and his brother had studied the sheep and cattle and
watched the competitions.  Then they joined other boys at a shooting
gallery and presently drifted to a boxing booth, where John Henry was
invited to spar with a lean, curly-headed Dago, but declined.

Auna kept close to her mother, who found many acquaintance at the
fair.  On the occasions of entertainments, she had grown to be glad
if her husband happened to be out of the way; for she knew that he
was happier so, and her own pleasure, without his restraint, became
greater.  She felt self-conscious before other people with Jacob
beside her, but struck a more unrestrained and joyous note when he
was not there.

They had met Adam Winter at a steam 'round-about,' where wooden
horses revolved to the blare of an organ.  Here he was spending
pennies for the entertainment of some young people and invited Auna
to mount, which she gladly did.  Then, as an afterthought, he urged
Margery to take a steed and did the same himself.  Auna, her pleasure
much increased by this arrangement, held her mother's hand as the
horses whirled round, while Winter, sitting on the steed behind them,
tickled Auna's ear with a peacock's feather.  The light began to grow
dusky, but the liveliness by no means abated.  People crowded now
round the dancers, now at the wild beast show, now among the 'Aunt
Sallys' and swings.

Upon this scene Jacob descended from above, and, over the upper edge
of the field, was able to see much from his uplifted position on
horseback, though, since his head was but little higher than the
hedge, none observed him looking through it.  He was about to ride to
the entrance, when he observed the big 'round-about' within thirty
yards of him.  Thus he saw Margery and Auna, watched Auna helped on
to a wooden horse and then marked Margery and Adam Winter enter upon
their juvenile amusement with other adults.  He saw them circle,
observed the rare jollity and high spirits of his wife, the evident
pleasure of the man.  Then the folly of intruding upon that crowd of
cheerful spirits weighed him down and he turned and rode off.  He
carried away only the memory of Margery's happiness.  She was
laughing as she never laughed at home; she was chattering to Adam and
her face was flushed.  And Winter rode behind her, as though she
belonged to him, while he played with Auna.  Who was the master of
Shipley to do such things?  Bullstone's bias swiftly exaggerated the
spectacle that his eyes had chronicled, and the essential virus in
his own imagination soon poured out to leaven all.  He saw Jeremy
ahead as he trotted home, but Jacob entered a gate and took a way
through fields and a plantation, to avoid his brother-in-law and
everybody else.  He did not wish it to be known, or reported again,
that he had been in sight of the fair.  As for Jeremy, he had
borrowed a few shillings from his father and was now returning to
Jane and his infant son with futile fairings.

Before he reached Shipley, Jacob wrestled with his reason concerning
what he had seen; but he could not dismiss the vision, and he told
himself that it was impossible to determine the gravity of the
situation until the end of that day.  He troubled himself as usual by
dwelling on details.  He wondered what would have happened had Auna
not been there.  Then, perhaps, instead of tickling the child with a
peacock's feather, Winter might have dared to touch Margery....  So
the poison flowed.  He tried to block his mind once or twice, but it
was useless.  He could not get away from what his eyes had seen; he
kept returning to every childish detail.  Then he fought to put all
behind him until his family returned.  Upon what Margery might choose
to reveal of the day's doings much would hang: so he assured himself.
He desired the night and their home-coming.  But they would not be
back until late, for it was understood that they supped with the
Huxams and stopped for the fireworks destined to end that day.

The fireworks tortured him again.  Who would be watching the
fireworks with Margery?  Time dragged unspeakably.  It seemed to him
that his wife had been gone for an age.  At nine o'clock he walked
out as far as Shipley Bridge to meet them.  Would Winter accompany
them?  Would they have offered him a place in the Red House trap?
They could not, unless the boys walked home.  Otherwise there would
be no room.

Darkness had descended and the autumn stars shone, for the threat of
rain had passed for a while at sunset.  He debated whether it would
be worse to find that Winter had driven home with his family, or had
not done so.  It was certain that, to such a mood, whichever course
Adam might take would present the graver anxiety.

He loitered, waiting for the sound of wheels while night thickened,
the stars disappeared, at last fine rain began to fall.  A heavy fish
splashed in the river, and then he heard, far off on the hither hill,
shouts and roystering laughter clear through the stillness.  He knew
that it was Josh Peatheyjohns back from the fair, taking leave of
Billy Marydrew.  He wondered what his old friend had made of his day,
how much whiskey he had drunk and how the morning would find him.
Then a trotting horse came briskly down the lane to the bridge and he
heard his children's laughter.

Would it stop and drop Winter, or no?  He could only see the vague
mass of the cart and the yellow ray it shot from a lamp into the
mist.  It did not stop, but went forward over the bridge, then turned
to the right for Red House.  All his family were there no doubt with
John Henry driving.  He hastened homeward arguing against himself.

At home he found a merry party chattering in the kitchen, and was
invited to see the fairings and hear of the day's fun.  Peter had
gone to put the horse up and John Henry told his father of those who
had won the prizes and how the sales had gone.  Margery declared the
fair was a great success and all considered it better than for ten
years past.  Avis showed gifts from Robert Elvin and told how well he
had sold his lambs.  Auna cuddled to Jacob on a great settle by the
fire.  She was very sleepy, but had to exhibit a peacock's feather.

"Mr. Winter gave it to me, father," she said.

The plume brought back the 'round-about' and, acting on impulse,
Jacob took the feather and thrust it into the fire.

"Unlucky," he said.  "We won't have a peacock's feather in this
house, whoever gave it to you, my precious."

There was silence and Auna gazed, round-eyed.

She never questioned her father.  His word was wisdom on every
subject; and though he had often rated his boys for repeating ancient
superstitions and laughed them out of the old folk-lore, she did not
remember that.

"Mr. Winter didn't ought to have given it to me if it's unlucky," she
said.

Margery felt the cloud, that had lifted for some good hours, limning
heavily about her.  She knew Jacob's excuse was nonsense, but she did
not guess the reason for his act and, unseen, resented it.

"To bed, to bed!" she cried.  "Be off, Auna, and you, Avis.  Our
chatter won't interest father."

Peter returned, asked after a suffering dog or two, heard that they
mended and then retired with John Henry.  Margery's maid was
returning on foot.  Barton Gill had gone to bed.

Jacob hung some of the damp coats to the fire and threw on a turf or
two.

"You've enjoyed yourself?" he asked.

"Yes--we've had a merry day.  I'm sorry Auna took that feather, but I
couldn't well refuse to let the kind man give it to her.  I didn't
know you were superstitious and I'm sure Adam Winter didn't.  We live
and learn, don't we?"

He waited for her to speak on, but she prepared to go to bed.

"Tell me about your adventures," he said slowly.

"No adventures--just a fair and all the fun of the fair.  The usual
thing--all very noisy and merry and a good deal that was silly I
expect; but it takes you out of yourself, and you see a lot of people
happy and forgetting their troubles for a minute.  That's something."

"What did you do?"

"What didn't I do?  Played about like a girl.  Avis spent her time
with Bob Elvin.  I think Master Bob has lost his heart in that
quarter.  He's old for his age.  John Henry was all for the stock and
the machines, and Peter poked about on his own.  We had a very nice
holiday dinner with father and mother and, after it, father came to
the fair, but mother stopped in the shop and let Miss Reed, from the
post-office, go off duty.  Then Jeremy turned up and we all played
about.  I took the children into the wild beast show, then they went
their ways again--all but Auna.  She kept with me and we went riding
on a 'round-about.'  Yes, I did, and Irm afraid I thought how vexed
you'd have been if you'd seen me."

"Why?"

"Oh--not dignified and all that.  But it was the spirit of the fun.
Auna loved it.  Lots of grown-up people rode."

"And when did Winter give Auna that feather?"

Margery laughed.

"Lord, my dear, you ought to have been a lawyer.  How do I know?  He
was there--everybody was there but you--and we met him.  His bull
'Turk' only got a second, and poor Samuel was cruel vexed about it.
We shall have to look after Avis and Bob.  Did you see his father?
He told me that Joe was no worse--just a bed-lier for evermore, poor
chap."

Jacob's mind was far from Mr. Elvin.  He felt that Margery should
have told him she had ridden on the steam horses with Adam Winter.
He had given her opportunity and she doubtless remembered the
incident very well.  But she was not going to tell him.  And it was
equally certain that he would never tell her he had seen her.  His
mind sickened, then, conscious of her question and ignorant that
three minutes had passed since she put it, he answered.

"Yes, I saw Joseph Elvin.  He is taking his misfortunes in a pretty
poor-spirited fashion and seems to think to escape them and pass into
peace is an evil.  He pecks at death with his long nose, like an
angry bird in a cage.  I told him death was no great matter for them
that died, only for them that are left behind; but he says in his
case, if he's got to go, it will be a very unfair and unrighteous
thing and contrary to justice.  As if he was the first that had
suffered from injustice!"

"He's not dead yet, however."

"No; only living death.  He'd hoped to retire and have a few years of
ease, before the end, so he's very angry it isn't to be."

"Poor chap.  It is hard.  Bob's much set on carrying on.  Should you
think he could do it, with his mother and the head man?"

"Yes, I think he could.  I think very well of him."

"But his father must reign while he lives of course."

"Of course.  No need to tell me that."

They talked in desultory fashion for ten minutes longer, then their
servant appeared and Jacob locked up and put out the lamps.

He did not immediately follow his wife to bed, but strode up and down
the kitchen deep in thought.  Once or twice a dog barked from the
kennels and he stood to listen.  Then he tramped up and down again
for a little longer.  He had no wish to speak any more and did not go
upstairs until he knew Margery would be asleep.

At last, as the clock chimed midnight, he took off his boots and
leggings and ascended to his chamber.  He listened at his children's
doors.  The boys, who slept together, were still talking and he
looked in and told them to go to sleep.  The girls also slept
together and he entered and listened.  Both slumbered.  He bent over
Auna's bed and kissed her; but he did not go to the larger bed
wherein Avis lay.




CHAPTER IX

THE GIFT

Margery, on her way to the post-office, called upon her brother at
the green-grocer's.  Jane and he had settled in and Jeremy declared
that the future might, at last, be regarded as cloudless.

"I've come into my kingdom," he said.  "I find I've got a feeling and
understanding for fruit and vegetables you wouldn't believe.  It was
hid in me all these years, waiting to get its chance.  Mother says I
dress a window better far than anybody she's known.  I've got a great
instinct for a pattern, Margery, and a pattern always makes an appeal
to the human eye.  You can catch almost any sort of mind with a
pattern, and what better for patterns than apples and oranges and so
on?"

The end of the year was come and Jeremy had excelled himself with a
design of fruit and brussel sprouts.  On the green ground he had
arranged 'A Happy Christmas' in yellow bananas--magnificent, but not
business in the opinion of experts.

Her brother once more showed Margery the wonders of the shop, and
Jane explained the working of the till, which interested her most.

"Once a week I go to Plymouth to buy choice fruits," explained
Jeremy, "but, at this time of the year, there's very little demand
for the highest things."

"Or at any time in a place this size," said Jane.  "We've had
pineapples and other curiosities go bad on our hands, and I pray he
won't bring any more back, because you can't return 'em when they're
past their prime, which very soon happens to 'em."

"These are the higher touches and flourishes you may say," explained
Jeremy.  "The solid backbone is greens and roots, including potatoes.
Did the notice over the shop strike you?  Just 'J. Huxam' in
chocolate and gold?"

"Shall you sell poultry?" asked Margery, and Jane hoped they might do
so.

"A little game also," said her husband.  "There's nothing interests
the better class of customers more than a good row of pheasants, or a
hare or two.  But that's for the future.  For the present I'm wanting
to make it known that my quality in fruit and vegetables is far ahead
of the old shop.  Then, again, it's wonderful what you can do selling
coals and coke on a small scale to the cottages.  I might develop in
that direction--of course not myself, but employing a staff."

It had always been Jeremy's ambition to employ a staff.

Jacob Bullstone met his wife presently by appointment at the shop,
and Margery made her Christmas purchases.  It was also understood
that Jacob conveyed a couple of tons of potatoes to his
brother-in-law.  The crop had been so large at Red House that Jacob
found himself with more than he would need and he now offered the
business of selling his surplus to his wife's brother.  Jeremy was
delighted and engaged to get a price high above that of the wholesale
markets.

"I'm working up a class of customer who can be trusted to pay for the
best, which is all they want.  Such people are only to be got by
accident, and I catch 'em with patterns.  They are passing by
perhaps, and never thinking of the class of fruit I sell, when they
just glance in, expecting to see the usual dreary piles of apples and
mounds of nuts and so on; but instead--well, you've only got to look
in the window yourself.  And I change it all every second or third
day.  Don't I, Jane?  I've got a mind for designing really, and I
feel sometimes it's a thousand pities I wasn't taught the designer's
art."

Customers interrupted Jeremy and they left him for the post-office.
Jacob came to do an act of kindness and was interested to hear how
his father-in-law would take it, He called it a 'Christmas box' and,
under that name, he had offered Barlow an acre of good land with a
road frontage, a quarter of a mile north of the railway station.  It
was a site in every way worthy of the habitation Mr. Huxam proposed
to erect during the following spring.

He had not seen Jacob since receiving this gift by letter, and now he
declared himself as absolutely unable to accept anything so great.

"We all know you for a very generous man," said Barlow, "and this
I'll so far meet you as to do: I'll pay what you paid for the land,
which still leaves me and my wife very much in your debt.  Because
the ground to-day is worth double what you spent upon it ten years
ago."

Jacob, however, would not budge.

"It's to be all, or none," he said.  "You must take my gift my
way--that I insist.  Only a small mind grudges to receive gifts, and
I know you're large minded enough for anything."

"I am," confessed Barlow.  "As I said to Judy when your letter came,
'this is the sort of seemly act which may well happen between a man
and his son-in-law.'  And needless to say that all we have, my wife
and me, will go to Jeremy and Margery and their children, when we
have no more need for it.  In this case, if it is to go through, we
should leave the villa residence to Margery."

"That's your affair," answered Jacob.  "It's an idea altogether
outside my scheme of things, though perhaps not hers."

Then Mrs. Huxam appeared.  She was not emotional on the subject of
the land, but dwelt on other aspects of the new house and the great
changes entailed by retirement.  Then Margery brought her back to the
gift and insisted on some expression concerning it.  Judith, however,
proved exceedingly dry.  She was consistent in her famous conviction:
that nothing happens outside the purpose of an all-seeing and
all-loving Creator.

"I am quite pleased about it," she said.  "When the Lord wills a
thing, it's always a great joy to weak, human nature if they thing
appeals to us and we can accept it in a humble, human spirit without
having to call upon faith.  As a rule, when God acts nowadays, so
faulty have our natures grown to be, that it generally demands great
trust and faith to see He is right; but when I heard Jacob had given
us that parcel of nice, sloping land under the plantations, I said,
'Good!'  I was glad for my husband, but I was still gladder for
Jacob, because we all know it's more blessed to give than receive.
We envy his power of giving and hope to be spared to practise it.
Meanwhile, to receive is very good discipline for my husband and me."

After supper Jacob and his father-in-law were left alone to discuss
the ground, and Barlow brought out the plans of the new house.  He
manifested a larger sense of obligation than Judith; indeed he
apologised for her.

"You mustn't take it in bad part," he said.  "My wife has such an
amazing sense of what's right, and such a lofty idea of human duty,
that it never surprises her when people do good and kind things.
It's a compliment to human nature, in a way, that she can see such
virtue displayed without showing surprise.  If you was a different
sort of man, then, no doubt, she'd have been struck dumb with wonder
and hesitated to take the gift, fearing some hidden motive for it;
but with you it's all plain sailing and aboveboard and in your
character.  You can't get a grape from a thorn, and if a thorn offers
you a grape, 'tis best to think twice before you taste it.  And so,
in a word, the way my wife have taken this is really a compliment to
you, and between me and my valued son-in-law there's no question at
all about the gift hurting.  In fact that's nonsense."

"You're a much cleverer man than you think you are, Barlow," answered
Jacob.  "You're so often called upon to smooth places left rough by
your high-minded wife, that you do it like second nature.  But it
argues great judgment and skill in you."

Mr. Huxam was pleased at this praise.

"I believe I am a clever man in my small way," he admitted.  "Judy
sees it, too; but she's doubtful if it's a virtue or a vice.  My best
art is to get round sharp corners.  It's a very useful gift in a
shop, and in life in general.  For that matter life itself is a shop,
Jacob.  We all bring our small wares to market, and some get a
purchaser and some never do.  What think you of Jeremy's new venture?
He says it's been the dream of his life to have a fruit shop.  But
he's said that before about everything that offered."

"I envy him his skill to win people," answered Jacob; "and it's a
good thing he's got that skill, because he'll always want his
fellow-creatures to help him fall light."

"I'm afraid so.  I understand him better than his mother, though
don't you repeat it.  She reckons that once Jeremy's in his proper
notch, we shall have a very cheering experience; and she also knows
that the virtuous man never is called to beg his bread.  That's all
right; but Jeremy's gifts ain't the sort that'll ever find butter.
He's a very ornamental sort of person; but ornament without
usefulness is a vain thing."

Elsewhere Margery spoke with her mother and revealed a growing
interest.

"Have you ever thought upon Robert Elvin, Joe's son, at Owley?" she
asked.

"I have not," answered Judith.  "Why should I think upon him?  He
comes in sometimes, on errands for his mother or father.  Civil
spoken and a good face."

"It will sound funny to your generation, but I reckon he's after
Avis."

"They're children, Margery!"

"To you, yes; not quite to me; not at all to themselves.  Bob is
nearly nineteen and has done a man's work for a couple of years now,
and Avis--she's old for her age too.  She likes him."

"Chasten her then.  She didn't ought to have an eye for a male for
years yet."

"It's all very pretty and natural.  She can't help it, and she don't
know in the least what it means I expect.  But he does.  He's not a
gadabout boy, or fond of the girls--quite the contrary; but he'll
often come over of a Sunday to dinner now and--look at her.  And
Jacob likes him.  He likes his nature.  I wouldn't say but that Bob
Elvin suits him better, in a manner of speaking, than his own sons."

"If so, then a very wicked thing," answered Mrs. Huxam.  "I trust
you're wrong, Margery, because that would show something in Jacob
that's contrary to religion.  And when you see things contrary to
religion, hope dies.  And if you tell me he looks at another man's
son more favourable than upon his own, then I little like it."

"It's nothing unnatural, mother.  Bob's very quiet and attends to
Jacob's every word.  John Henry and Peter don't listen to him as
close as they might.  They're full of their own ideas; and Jacob
doesn't pretend to be a farmer, though, of course, he knows all about
it really.  But he lets John Henry run on and never troubles much to
contradict him.  And Robert don't run on.  He listens and says but
little.  He's anxious above his age, with the cares of the farm and a
dying father.  He's called to think of many things that my boys
haven't got to think about.  We cheer him up."

"There's nothing whatever to cast him down about his father,"
answered Judith.  "That's a part of life we've all got to face; and
if Joe Elvin is right with Christ, then to see him getting daily
nearer his reward should be a good sight for a good son.  It's only
selfishness makes us mourn, just as half the big, costly marble
stones in the churchyard are stuck up to ourselves rather than to the
dead."

"Like will cleave to like, and his two sons aren't like Jacob very
much.  He loves them dearly, mother, and is proud of them; but he
don't care to see any of us coming forward.  He's sensitive and
shrinking about his own.  I never shall understand all there is to
him and I won't pretend it.  One thing is sure: he never wounds by
intent, like most men do when they're angry.  He never is angry
outside.  He has a sort of cold anger; but you can't always tell why,
and he never lets you know why.  Of course every man has got his own
difficulties and the side he hides from his wife."

"Not at all," answered her mother.  "Many men hide nothing, for the
very good reason they've got nothing to hide; and many men hide
nothing, for the very good reason they can't.  Look at your father.
Would I have stood secrets and 'cold anger' as you call it?  I
wouldn't stand hot anger, or any sort of anger; because well I know
that he's got nothing to be angry about.  For that matter to be angry
at all is godless and means weak faith."

Margery had sometimes considered the wisdom of confiding her
difficulties to Mrs. Huxam; but she had never done so.  She was not
proud for herself, but still felt very proud for Jacob; and to
confess the truth would be to weaken him in her mother's eyes.  In a
sense she was glad that her husband could be jealous of her, since
she supposed that such an emotion only existed in connection with
very deep and passionate love; and if he had long since ceased to
give any outward signs of such a love, (by sacrificing himself more
to her reasonable tastes, for example) jealousy, she thought, must
none the less prove that fierce affection still existed unseen.  She,
therefore, conscious of the baselessness of his error, troubled only
occasionally about it and was wholly ignorant of its extent, of its
formidable and invisible roots in his nature, ever twining and
twisting deeper for their food, and finding it in his own imagination
alone.  So she kept dumb concerning her discomfort, and indeed,
disregarded it, save at the fitful intervals when it was made
manifest before her eyes.  And she erred in supposing these almost
childish irruptions sprang from no deep central flame.  To her they
were in a measure absurd, because she knew that they were founded
upon nothing; but her error lay in ignorance of origins: she had
never glimpsed the secret edifice that her husband had built--a house
of dreams, but a house solid and real and full of awful shadows for
him.

They walked home together presently and Margery told Jacob how
greatly he had pleased her father.

"I know him so well," she said.  "It moved him a great deal."

"It didn't move your mother, however."

"Yes it did; but you understand her way of looking at things--at
everything that comes along."

"What did you think of the land regarded as discipline for them?"

"I thought it rather fine," said Margery.  "It was so like mother.
We can't appreciate the high, unchanging line she takes.  It doesn't
surprise her when men do generous things, any more than it surprises
her when they do wicked things.  That's her knowledge of human
nature.  And the pluck of her!  How many are there who don't feel
favours to be a bit of a nuisance; and how many have the courage to
say so frankly?"

Jacob considered this.

"Wouldn't you have felt just the same, even if you weren't stern
enough to say it?" she asked.

"Yes--I suppose I should."

"You may have the chance some day and find yourself in debt for
gratitude."

"Gratitude should not be difficult, however."

"Why, I've heard you say yourself it's a terrible rare virtue!  And
you know, for no kind man has laid people under obligations oftener
than you."

"I've never asked gratitude, Margery.  The pleasure lies in doing a
good turn."

"Very well then," she answered.  "Remember your pleasure may be a
sort of one-sided pain to the other party.  Only with some people, of
course.  Some clatter enough gratitude I'm sure; but often the most
grateful hide it.  Mother's grateful enough.  She knows what men can
rise to, but she also knows how seldom they do.  She never denies
praise in the right quarter.  Though she may not thank you, she'll
thank God hearty enough, and no doubt say a prayer on your account
also.  The Chosen Few may not know everything there is to know; but
they know it's difficult to be as generous as you; and when things
like that happen, it cheers them, and they praise the Lord for
letting His Light shine out so clear in a fellow-creature."

This pleased Jacob and he accepted it.

"Very good, Margery," he said.  "I'm glad you said that.  I thought
something different.  I thought gratitude depends on the giver as
much as the gift, and I reckoned, because your mother doesn't like
me, that she didn't like the land.  But I see clearer now and have
got you to thank."

"Mother does like most of you," answered his wife, "She likes you
quite as well as you like her, Jacob."

Then they fell silent and his momentary warmth faded.




CHAPTER X

AFTER THE HOLIDAY

Chance is half-sister to destiny, and though her patterns appear less
orbicular and complete, yet seen in the fulness of their weaving,
from a standpoint sufficiently detached, they are often as inexorable
and consummate.  As Jeremy built designs with his apples and oranges;
as Jacob built the ideal Bullstone terrier, working year after year
with canine flesh and blood to attain the ideal; so chance, operating
upon his temperament, defied its own slight name and wrought, with
personal intention as it seemed, rather than unconscious accident,
for a definite object.  Chance appeared to exercise a malign
ingenuity in finding substance.  It was as though an initial incident
had opened the eyes of Moira, weaver of destinies, and upon that
trivial circumstance, she had elected to build the edifice of Jacob's
life, choosing only one fatal material for the fabric, to the
exclusion of others that might as reasonably have been selected.

The new year began; then, after a pause, wherein progress proceeded
so slowly that Bullstone was not aware of movement, a quickening
period followed.  Thus he had always advanced--by jolts and thrusts
forward--never smoothly.  But remission did not blunt the raw edges
of incomplete work; they were always ready to receive the next
addition, when reinforcement came to the ghostly builders.

With another summer, Margery's annual holiday to Plymouth returned.
It was Auna's year to accompany her mother, and when both were gone
to Mr. Lawrence Pulleyblank, Jacob speculated as to whether his wife,
or his youngest child left the larger gap in his life.  He examined
the problem and decided that no comparison could be instituted, since
each represented a different plane of existence and a different field
of emotional interest.  But though unable to pursue the problem
through any rational argument, to solve it was easy enough.  His own
soul told him that he missed Auna more than her mother; because Auna
was far nearer what Margery had been when first he loved her, but
could be no longer.  Bullstone shared the usual rooted conviction of
the married, that their partners have mightily altered during the
years of united life.  He assured himself that his own foundations
were exactly as of yore, and that still he stood for the same ideals
and purposes.  It was Margery who had changed; Margery who had been
blown away from the old anchorage in his heart and now sailed other
seas.  But in Auna he believed that he saw again exactly what his
wife had been; in Auna he perceived growing all that had made him
fall in love with Margery.  Thus now he lived the more happily in her
companionship.  She was close to him and she loved him with devotion;
but his wife did not.  She had gone afield.  He knew not how far off
she had really wandered, but believed that the gap between them
continued to lengthen as the years passed; that her outlines grew
dimmer; that less and less she shared his days, more and more pursued
her own, where he possessed neither will nor power to follow.  And
she had reached to a similar opinion concerning him.

Margery and Auna had been away a week, and Auna had already sent her
father two letters full of her adventures.  Then Jacob happened to be
with Barton Gill, who was now reduced to milking the goats and doing
other tasks within his waning activity.  For the present Avis, free
of school and not desirous to learn more that school could teach her,
was exalted to kennel-maid, a part she filled with enthusiasm.

Gill was grumbling as usual and expressing revolutionary doubts
concerning goats' milk for puppies.  Peter had already dared to
question its supreme value and Barton, who thought highly of Peter's
knowledge and personally disliked the flock, began to wonder if the
later wisdom might not discover a substitute.  Jacob, however, would
not hear of any change.

"Time you stopped altogether and took your ease, Barton, if you're
going to put Peter's opinions higher than your own experience," he
said.  "Goats' milk was the first and best food for puppies long
before my boy, Peter, came into the world; and it will continue to be
long after he goes out of it, theories or no theories.  The modern
idea is to get the old, fine results all round, with half the old,
hard work; and, such a fool is man, that he believes it can be done."

Then came Sammy Winter along the river path beside the kennels.  He
peered in, tried the iron door and finding it locked, shouted to
Jacob, who stood within the yard.  At his noise a dozen dogs barked
and Bullstone admitted him.

"Evening, Samuel.  And how is it with you?" he asked.  "Haven't seen
you this longful time."

"I be very nicely indeed," answered Sammy, "but our sheep-dog ban't;
and I should be most thankful if you would come over, or else Gill,
and look at his paw.  He's drove something into it--a hob-nail I dare
say; but he won't let me look, and he yowls and shows his teeth if I
offer for to touch him."

Gill laughed.

"Fancy that now, Sammy--you, so bold as a hero with 'Turk,' as nobody
dursn't handle but you, and yet feared of a little thing like a
sheep-dog.  I never would have believed it."

"You shut your head," answered the other.  "You don't know nothing
better'n to milk goats.  The dog's a devil-dog; and I'd have shot him
long ago if I'd had my way.  But he's a terrible useful dog and if
anything was to overtake him such as death he'd be a cruel loss.  And
if you dare to say I be frightened, Barton Gill, I'll be revenged
against you some of these days."

Samuel was easily moved and could never stand the mildest jest
against himself, or his brother.  He glowered at Gill and his jaw
worked.

"Don't cry about it," said Jacob kindly.  "We've all got our likes
and dislikes, Samuel.  I wouldn't handle bees for the world, yet you
can go among them and take the honey, brave as a bear.  We're all
frighted at some thing--if it's only our poor selves."

"'Tis a devil-dog, I tell you," repeated Sammy, "and 'Turk' hates him
as much as me."

"Well I don't fear him.  But can't Adam tackle him?"

"Yes he can.  Adam's got the whip-hand of him, I grant.  But Adam
ain't there.  He's gone away."

"Gone away--where?" asked Bullstone.  "It isn't often your brother
takes a holiday."  A proleptic throb went through him.  He felt that
he knew Samuel's answer before he made it.  And he was right.

"To Plymouth, after calves.  Some proper calves he've bought off a
man; and he's bringing 'em home by rail on Tuesday; and if I ban't at
the station with this damned dog, I don't rightly know what might
happen."

Bullstone was silent for a few moments, then he returned to the
present.

"Come on," he said abruptly, and going to a little chamber at the
kennels, collected a pair of gloves, one or two instruments and a
bottle of healing lotion.  These he put into his pocket and set off
to Shipley Farm beside Samuel.

He asked concerning Adam's purchase of calves, but the other only
knew that they would arrive early the following week and must be met.

The patient--a great, high-sterned English sheep-dog, with touzled
head and bright eyes, one of which was blue, the other green--showed
no temper to Bullstone, but he harboured private grudges against
Samuel, who had been cruel to him in secret, and he probably
associated his present misery with the enemy.  Jacob extracted a
large splinter of wood from his paw and dressed the wound, while the
bob-tailed dog expressed nothing but well-mannered gratitude and
licked his face.

"He'll be all right in twenty-four hours, Samuel.  Shut him up till
noon to-morrow, so as he can't get running in the muck, and give him
an extra good supper," advised Bullstone.  Amelia, who had witnessed
the operation, thanked her neighbour.

"And Adam will be properly grateful, I'm sure, when he hears tell of
it.  A very friendly thing, and I never thought as you would come
yourself."

"Your nephew's at Plymouth--eh?  My wife and Auna are down there with
Mr. Pulleyblank," explained Jacob.

"To be sure.  And I hope the sea air will do Margery good.  She've
looked a thought pinnickin and weary to my eye of late.  Too thin,
Jacob."

"She always enjoys the change.  I might go down for a day or so,
perhaps, and fetch her back."

"A very clever thought," declared Amelia; "and I've asked Adam to
bide there a few days, for he never takes a holiday and it will do
him good and rest him.  So I hope he will bide."

Bullstone weighed every word of this conversation as he walked home,
and he lay awake till the dawn, oppressed--now striving to see
nothing in it, now confronted with visions that worked him into a
sweat of doubt and dismay.  He determined to go to Plymouth.  He laid
his plans.  Then he banished the thought and decided against any such
step.  Auna had not mentioned Adam Winter in her letters.  He rose,
lighted a candle, descended and read them again, to be sure.  They
cast him down immeasurably, because they mentioned that Auna had been
on the sea for a long day with her great-uncle; but her mother had
not gone.  Margery did not like the sea.  She had been free--planned
to be free--of Auna and her uncle--for many hours.  And Winter was in
Plymouth.

He returned to his bed and suffered a flood of desolate thoughts to
flow through his mind, till barn cocks were crowing against each
other in the grey of dawn.  He got up, threw open his window and saw
stars still hanging over Shipley Tor.  Then he returned to his bed
again, and worn out, slept at last.  It wanted but five minutes to
the breakfast hour when he awoke, then dressed hurriedly and
descended unshaved to his children.

He was very taciturn; but they did not notice that he kept a heavier
silence than usual and chattered among themselves.

"'Red Beauty's' got her puppies, father," said Avis.  "Four."

"Good--good," he answered.

John Henry was going to Bullstone Farm for the day and meant to spend
some time with Bob Elvin at Owley also.

"Mother thought that when I went, I might take one of the ox tongues
she cured, for Mr. Elvin, because he can't let down his food very
well nowadays," said John Henry.

"An excellent notion," answered his father.  "Be sure you remember
it."

"And ask Bob if he's coming Sunday," said Avis.

John Henry laughed knowingly.

"No need to ask, I reckon.  I'll tell him you've got a new hat, with
a jay's feather in it.  He couldn't shoot a jay for you, but I did."

"I'll lay he'll shoot a jay when he's got time," answered Avis.

"'Got time,'" sneered John Henry.  "If I was after a maiden, I'd make
time to shoot an elephant, if she wanted one."

They chattered and Avis was well pleased.  Their talk drifted past
Jacob where he sat.  They did not notice that he ate no breakfast.

Time dragged dreadfully for the man and a letter from his wife did
not shorten it.  He half hoped that she would mention Winter; but
Margery made no allusion to the farmer; and Bullstone knew that if
she had mentioned him, he must still have read evil into the fact.
He told himself that.  Margery could not have met with Winter by an
accident in a place so large as Plymouth.  If she had met him, it was
by design.  He made himself believe that they had not met.  But he
intended to be sure, though he would not ask her.  Margery's letter
was frank enough and her time appeared to be fully engaged.  She was
feeling better and stronger.  She sent directions for home and wrote
of things to be told to the servant, to Avis and the boys.  Auna was
enjoying herself and loved to be on the sea.

Adam Winter would be coming back on Tuesday, according to Samuel;
therefore Jacob invented a message for him and sent Peter to deliver
it.  But he returned to say that Mr. Winter had not come home.  The
calves duly arrived and were safe at Shipley; but Adam delayed for a
few days, to make a longer holiday, as Miss Winter had suggested.

Bullstone battled in secret and came to a bitter conclusion.  It was
exceedingly unlikely that such a man as the master of Shipley would
dawdle by the sea for his health's sake.  Some far greater and more
pressing reason kept him from home.  Jacob raged over this, departed
from himself and determined upon an action entirely foreign to his
genius.  He resolved to see Winter and challenge him.  He planned to
confront the man and woman when they returned and judge them out of
their own mouths.  But he knew, even while he designed such drastic
deeds, that they would never happen.

Winter returned some days sooner than Margery was due to do so.  She
had, indeed, written a second letter to Jacob, asking if he would let
her extend her holiday for three days at the entreaty of her uncle,
who made a great favour of it.  She apologised for the delay, but
knew he would not mind.  He raised no objection, and avoided Adam
Winter, desiring now that he should first find whether Margery made
any mention of him when she came home.

He drove to Brent and met his wife and daughter at the appointed
time; and he found Margery well and in unusually cheerful spirits.
Like every woman whose existence is subject to the tyranny of the
passing hour, her nervous energy and temper had both gained tone from
rest.  But she declared herself as beyond measure delighted to be
home again.  Auna, too, was much more talkative than usual.  She had
brought her father and brothers and sister presents from Plymouth,
and again and again declared her delight at the sea.  Twice she had
been upon it and seen a trawl shot and fish caught.  But neither she
nor her mother had anything to say of Adam Winter, and, after
fighting with himself not to do so, Jacob took opportunity to
question Auna when her mother was not present.  It argued a new
attitude and he suffered before sinking to it.  Indeed for some time
he resisted the temptation; but the thirsty desire to discover things
possibly hidden conquered pride.  He convinced himself that he must
leave no channel unexplored and face every painful need to attain
reality; while in truth he lived in a world of increasing unreality
and his values steadily began to have less correspondence with fact.

Auna caused a passing revulsion, and his heart smote him before her
ingenuous replies to the questions that he put.  He asked for no
direct revelation, but came to the matter sidelong and sought to know
what his wife did for entertainment on the days that Auna went to
sea.  The child was apparently familiar with all that Margery had
done on shore while they were separated; but the circumstantial
account of her mother's doings, evidently related to Auna on her
return, awoke new suspicions.  For why should Margery have been at
pains to tell the child so much and relate her doings so fully?  Auna
had not seen or heard of Mr. Winter.  Jacob mentioned the fact that
their neighbour was in Plymouth at the same time as the child and her
mother; but he did not follow the statement with any direct question.
He mentioned the coincidence as of no importance, and when Auna
declared that she had not known it, added casually, "Mother did not
see him, then?"

"I'm sure she'd have told great-uncle if she had," answered the
child, "because he's so good to everybody, and great-uncle would very
like have given Mr. Winter a treat and let him go trawling."

Whereupon Jacob, stricken to passing self-contempt, made one of his
great, periodic efforts to believe that all was well with his life.
Margery had come home stronger and more cheerful than he had seen her
for some time.  She was full of activity, and she found her home very
sufficient for present happiness and interest.  She seemed a closer
and more understanding friend than usual to her husband, and he
argued with himself and strove to build hopeful resolutions upon her
good-will.  But to attempt such a position now, or regain peace, even
for a brief interval, though it entailed immense concentration on
Jacob's part, was in reality impossible, for the man had reached a
main attitude from which no final retirement was likely until the
actual truth should be attained--either to support and vindicate him,
or confound him for ever.  He struggled to some vague standpoint of
hope for a little while.  It served him but two days, then perished
before a meeting with Adam Winter.

Adam saw Jacob pass his gate on the way to Brent and hastened to stop
him before he went out of earshot.  He flung down his fork, for he
was digging potatoes, and joined his neighbour.  Winter's object was
only to thank Jacob for tending his sheep-dog; and when he had done
so, he spoke of an incident from the immediate past as though it had
no significance whatever.

"Funny how small the world is," he said.  "To think that two such
stop-at-homes as your wife and me should actually meet in a great
place like Plymouth!"

Jacob seemed to forget that Adam was part of the tale himself.  For a
strange moment he looked through him merely as the teller--as a
machine narrating fearful facts and not implicated in them.  His mind
thrust Winter and Margery back to Plymouth.  He was alert, strung to
acute tension.  He pretended.

"Odd you should meet sure enough," he said, and felt the perspiration
break on his forehead.

"Yes, faith, I saw her looking in a shop window in George Street.
'Hullo, Mrs. Bullstone, nothing ever happens but the unexpected!'" I
said, "and she jumped around.  Two poor strangers in a strange
country we were, and glad to meet according.  We drank a cup of tea
together.  But you'll have heard all this."

"Yes--yes--she told me all about it.  I must get on now--I must get
on now, Winter."

He hurried away and Adam, disappointed of a talk, looked after him in
some surprise.  He had not the faintest notion that Jacob was
distressed at the matter of their few words, yet could not fail to
see perturbation.  This appeared still more apparent five minutes
later, for then the farmer marked his neighbour walking back to Red
House.  He had evidently changed his mind about Brent and was now
returning home.

In truth a great storm had raged in Jacob after leaving Shipley and
he was tossed to confusion among frantic thoughts.  He could not
understand; he read guile into everything that concerned his wife.
He assured himself that, as soon as his back was turned, Adam would
go up the valley to speak with Margery.  He felt certain Adam had
read him, and was not deluded into thinking that he had really known
these facts.  Adam would doubtless perceive he had made a mistake to
mention his meeting with Margery at all; and he would then hurry off
to warn Margery.  Inspired by this suspicion and feeling it vital
that he should see Margery before she learned of Winter's
conversation and admission, he turned back and made haste to
anticipate the farmer.

But Adam was still working in his garden.  Jacob guessed that he
might meet Margery coming from Red House to see the other man; for
she knew that he had gone to Brent.  Jacob told himself that it would
be wiser in future to keep his movements a secret.  But, after all,
Margery was not upon the way, and she expressed genuine astonishment
when he appeared.

"Forgotten something?" she asked.

"I don't forget," he answered.  "It's for others to forget.  But I
remembered certain facts, and they saved my journey.  I turned just
beyond Shipley Bridge."

He made no mention of Adam Winter, but changed his mind again, said
nothing and took occasion to keep at home until Margery had next met
Adam herself.  This happened within a week, when she went to Shipley
Farm to see Amelia.  Her manner was pensive after she returned, and
Jacob expected that he would now have some story from her.  He knew
that she had met Winter and doubtless learned from him how the thing
she had chosen to conceal was out.  For his own reasons apparently
Adam had chosen to record the meeting, while Margery had not.  But
why had Winter mentioned the incident at all?  How much easier to
have said nothing.  His wife's manner changed after her visit to
Shipley Farm, and on the evening afterwards, she asked Jacob to walk
with her up the valley in the idle, sunset hour.

Instantly he guessed what she was going to say, and a great regret
flashed through him that he had not himself challenged her, after
seeing Adam Winter.  Then her version of the meeting might have
possibly differed from the farmer's and helped him towards the truth;
now that they had spoken together, no doubt she would have heard what
he had said and echo his version.

Jacob decided to hear, yet believed that he knew what he would hear.

Above the kennels, Auna River wound through a deep place, where the
moor descended to her margins and only a fisherman's path ran through
the brake fern.  Between steep and verdant banks the waters came, and
upon the hills round about flashed gems of golden green, where
springs broke out of the granite and fell from mossy cradles to the
valley.  Here and there the water-side opened on green spaces cropped
close by the rabbits, and at intervals a little beach of pebble and
sand extended by the shallows of the stream.  Now the river spread
her arms to make an islet, where grey sallows grew and the woodrush;
and sometimes she narrowed to a glimmering cleft, then by a waterfall
leapt forward again into the light.  A warm evening glow lay upon the
eastern hill and each isolated stone, or tree, burnt with sunset
brightness; but the valley was in shadow, very cool after the heat of
a late August day.

"I always love this place and this time," said Margery.  "It's full
of memories--precious ones to me."

"I thought you were like Billy Marydrew and never looked back," he
answered.

"You must look back, to save heartbreak, if the past is happier than
the present.  To remember pure happiness--that's something."

"It only makes the present worse than it need be.  To know what life
might be and feel what it is--that's the bitter spring where half the
discontent in the world rises from."

"And the jealousy and mistrust and bad will too, I dare say.  Look
here, Jacob, I'm cruel sorry about Adam Winter.  I'm sorry for
myself, and sorrier for him."

"But not for me?"

"Yes, for you, because you're such an infant still--groping and blind
for all your wisdom--and no more able to read character than a child.
I met Adam Winter in Plymouth.  I was alone.  Auna had gone to sea
with Uncle Lawrence and I'd been to the Guildhall, where there was a
great concert.  But I came out before the end, because I was tired of
it, and looking in a shop window Adam found me.  We went and had tea
together.  And then he told me his aunt had begged him to stop a few
days more, so we fixed to meet again, and we did do, when Auna was to
sea again.  And once more we had tea in a big shop in the midst of
the town."

"But you never breathed a word of this until you found that Winter
had told me about it."

"I did not, because I feared it might vex you."

"Vex me!  Is that all?  A pretty small word."

"Surely large enough for such a small thing.  It couldn't, at worst,
do more than vex you to know I'd met a good neighbour and drank tea
with him."

"I'd give my immortal soul to look in your heart," he answered.

"It's always open for you, if you'd believe your eyes."

For a moment he did not speak.  Then he asked a question:

"And why did you do what you knew would vex me?"

"I did it because I wanted to do it, being sure no honest reason
existed against.  I set no store by it and never thought of it again.
If I'd thought of it, I might have asked Mr. Winter not to mention
the matter; but--no, that's not true neither.  I certainly should
never have dreamed of asking him that."

"Why?"

"Good Lord!  Can't you see?  What would it have made you look like.
I'm proud for you as well as myself.  I know you wouldn't have liked
me to drink tea with him; but how could I tell him that?  He would
have wanted to know why you didn't--and then--for that matter I don't
know why myself.  I only knew in an unconscious sort of way,
remembering silly things in the past, that you wouldn't have liked
it."

A hundred questions leapt to Jacob's lips; but he did not put them.
She was, he thought, guiding the conversation away from the actual
event.  She had told him what she had arranged with Winter to tell
him and no more; and that done, now wanted to leave the subject,
saddle him with folly, call him a child, and so come out as the
aggrieved party.  But this he would not suffer.

"Did you know Winter was going to Plymouth?" he asked.

"I did not.  He only decided to go after I left."

"But he knew you were there?"

"Yes; but he was just as surprised as I that we met."

"So you say."

Then she flamed and turned upon him, in such anger as he had never
seen from her before.

"What are you doing?  What are you trying to do?  D'you want to smash
up your home?  D'you want me away?  If my record these seventeen
years is that of a woman you can't trust out of your sight, then say
so and I shall know what to do.  But think--think for God's sake
first, and use your wits, and get your mind clear of all this
beastliness.  Try and look at life from my point of view, for a
change, if you can.  I'm many years younger than you and I married
you for pure love, well knowing that I'd have to give up a few
things--nothing compared with the joy of wedding with you--but little
knowing how many things I'd have to give up.  I've lived here--and
never hungered for the pleasures--the fun and stir--that meant so
much to me; I've let much that would have made my life fuller and
happier go without a sigh, because I had what was better; and
now--now, in sight of middle age--this.  And I'll not endure it,
Jacob.  Much I'd endure--anything--everything in justice and reason
but this is out of reason.  It's a needless thorn--a scourge for an
innocent back.  You wish you could look in my heart.  I wish to God
you could; and you'd see what would shame you--shame you.  D'you know
what stock I am, if you don't know what I am myself?  And I tell you
this: I've been a good, faithful mother to your children and a good,
faithful wife to you.  That all the world knows, and if I was to
start and whine about being kept like a broody hen under a coop,
there's many would sympathise with me and blame you; but if you were
to whisper in any ear on earth that I was not all I ought to be, the
people would call you a moon-struck liar--and that's what you would
be."

"I don't shout my troubles, Margery."

"No; because you well know what they'd sound like if you did.
Instead you breathe the bad air of 'em, and let 'em foul and sicken
you.  They only look out of your eyes when I look into them.  You
take cruel, good care to hide them from everybody else--and so do
I--for common decency.  Why d'you hide them?  Tell me that.  And I
tell you I won't much longer hide them--I swear I won't.  If you
think evil of me, then let it out.  Point your finger at me before
the people and hear what they'll say about it.  I've lived your life
without a murmur, but if so to do, and sink myself in you as I have
done, is to win no better reward than----  There, we'd best to leave
it before I say what could never be unsaid."

He did not immediately answer.  He was impressed--for a moment
relieved.  Her indignation rang true.  He felt disposed to express
sorrow and even promise practical proofs of his regret at causing her
such suffering; but he considered deeply first.  He had to convince
himself that these words were sincere and not merely uttered by a
woman acting cleverly to hide her cherished secrets.  They sounded as
though from her heart: she had never spoken with such passion; but
such a clever woman might be quite capable of pretending, if she
thought it wise.  He wanted to believe her; for if he could do so, it
would lift his immense agony off his shoulders at one gesture and
lighten the load of the past as well as promise some brighter hope in
the present.  He perceived that, if he could believe her, the
situation was saved, for he would have no difficulty in thinking of a
thousand things to prove the sincerity of his own regret and the size
of his own amendment.  He would not be ashamed to confess his errors
to Margery, if she could convince him that they were errors.

They walked silently side by side for a few hundred yards and she
waited for him to speak.  She grew calmer and realised the quality of
her tremendous counter-attack.  She had never stripped him bare to
himself in this fashion; but she did not regret a word.  She was
hating him heartily while she spoke.  Only his tyranny and her long
endurance held her thoughts.  Apart from his own troubles, which she
scorned as the folly of a lunatic, she was glad that opportunity had
offered to remind him of hers.  He had outraged her, and no word that
she could speak was too hard for him.  So she still felt.

Her temper rose again at his continued silence.

"Things are at a climax now," she said, "and I won't have no more
doubt and darkness between us.  It's wrong and sordid and mean and
hateful.  You've got to say you're sorry, Jacob--you've got to tell
me straight out, in plain words, that you're sorry for what you've
thought against me, for God knows how long.  You've got to do it, and
you've got to show me you mean it.  Either that, or I'll leave you.
I'll go and live my own clean life and not share yours another week."

"That's quite true, Margery.  There's no third course."

"Decide then; decide, decide this instant moment if you call yourself
a man.  Why should I breathe the same air as you and suffer what I'm
suffering now while you make up your mind?  Why should you have to
make up your mind?  What devil's got in you to make you doubt a woman
like me?  Or do you doubt all women?  If you do, you're mad and ought
to be locked up.  When I think of it, I wish to Christ this river had
drowned me into peace afore ever I gave myself to you at all."

She flung herself on the ground and wept; her anger expired.  She was
only bitterly conscious of dishonour and degradation.  Not built to
suffer very deeply, or very long, suffering, when it did come, broke
like a hurricane over Margery and beat her down before its onset.
But she had a spirit to spring up again, a spirit avid for such hope
and happiness as might be within reach.  It was a spirit as innocent
as a child's, and her pleasures were such that any child might have
shared them with her.

Jacob Bullstone slowly expressed contrition.  He imagined that he
believed her; and the conviction plunged through his soul, sweeping
bare the rocks and channels.  It was real and did a temporary,
cathartic work; but while it cleansed the stuff he was made of, it
could not alter the stuff.  By an effort of will be abased himself.
He knelt down beside her and prayed for forgiveness.  He poured scorn
upon himself and talked until, knowing that much speech was foreign
to him, Margery began to be fearful of this phenomenon and her tears
dried.  She bade him cease at last; but he persisted and showed
himself a new man in her eyes--a strange man, whom she presently
began to pity.  She knew that Jacob would never be the same to her
again; but she did not know whether he would stand ultimately higher,
or lower, as a result of what had happened between them.  She was
weary and unspeakably sorrowful, for her heart could not be hard and
her natural sympathies were large.  He seemed to roll back time and
even speak with the voice of the lover from the far past.  He pleaded
for absolute forgiveness; he was very humble and he promised on his
oath to change from that hour.

"God helping," he said, "this is a day that shall see us nearer and
dearer to each other than ever we have been.  And I ask you to
forgive, because I want you to do that before you see what I shall
do, Margery, and not afterwards.  Bear with me if you can a bit
longer yet; trust the future till I show you what I'll make of it."

She was glad enough to accept all that he said and to express regret
for her own words.

"Let us forget for mercy's sake.  Let us forget every syllable and go
on with our lives," she said.

"Forget never," he answered; "but go on with our lives we will.
Watch me."

She had it on her lips to add:

"And for Christ's sake, don't watch me;" but she did not endanger the
harmony now attained.  She remembered how they had walked in this
place as lovers, and she put her hand in his.  Thus they went back
silently together.




CHAPTER XI

THE OFFER OF OWLEY

A position was defined and an understanding attained between husband
and wife, while the unconscious party to their difficulties knew
nothing.  Thus Adam Winter, in absolute ignorance of the fact, stood
upon the brink of events for which he was not responsible--his life
being, as all lives, much at the mercy of his fellow-creatures.

Margery's pride kept her tongue still, for she would have endured
anything rather than confess the truth.  The truth not only
stultified Jacob, but it would cast an unjust doubt upon herself if
revealed to any other.  She knew that many husbands had cause for
jealousy and she guessed that, if she warned Winter of Jacob's
weakness, he might, while certainly taking no blame upon himself,
judge that no smoke existed without fire and imagine that, in some
quarter, she had given Bullstone a real cause for his emotion.  She
valued the farmer's good opinion too highly to risk implanting any
such suspicion in his mind.  She saw no reason why she should not be
fair to herself, and indeed little temptation to speak to anybody
longer existed.  She had accepted Jacob's apology and the promise of
contrition, and since the latter presently took an active form, there
rose in her a genuine thankfulness that the long-drawn horror was
dispelled.  She leapt to welcome the relief.  She grew happier and
the sensation of increasing resentment, that she should be called to
endure his distrust--the sense of living under perpetual insult which
she had indicated to him in her anger--died completely.

Jacob himself made a supreme effort and performed actions that
presented great difficulties to him.  He ruminated for days in
solitude and then took two steps, the one trivial, yet rich with
satisfaction for Margery; the other momentous.  He hesitated long
concerning the latter; but opportunity for the first quickly offered
and he took it.

To the amazement of his family Bullstone announced a day of
pleasuring, and it was not such a day as he sometimes planned--no
picnic into the wastes of the Moor, or other excursion, which meant
little delight for anybody but himself and Auna.  He proposed to take
them all to Totnes Races--a jollity beyond their utmost expectations.
The youngsters were openly incredulous, only Margery understood and
appreciated his sacrifice.  The day passed without a cloud and, when
night came, his wife thanked Jacob in words that repaid him well.

"I'm not going to pretend to myself that you enjoyed it," she said;
"and I know, with your nature, you couldn't, my dear.  The trains
were enough, without anything else.  And yet I wouldn't have had you
away, and I wouldn't have gone without you.  But you've given a mint
of pleasure to us all; and the children are grateful, and I'm more
than grateful."

"Let be," he said.  "It was a well spent day and I'm none the worse
for it, if those I care most for are the better."

But greater things were in his mind and, when the news came that
Joseph Elvin was near his end, Bullstone took action.  He hesitated
long, for he looked ahead and told himself that the cost of failure
would stir banked fires and waken evil fears he was fighting to
destroy for ever.

He designed a great proposition and everything depended upon another.
Immense good must result if the other could meet him, and a stroke
precious for his peace be accomplished; but should his suggestion be
opposed and declined, then more than passing disappointment would be
the result.  He reached a point where a serious hitch delayed
decision.  The man he proposed to approach was Adam Winter, and now,
labouring over every detail of the coming conversation, he tried to
look at it from Adam's point of view.  Immediately his mind was up in
arms.  Everything hinged on motive, and the great problem centred in
Winter's attitude and Winter's secret opinions of what inspired the
offer about to be made to him.  Bullstone was almost minded to
abandon his project after viewing it from this standpoint.  For,
though to any other man, his motive must be obvious enough and
grounded in Jacob's own advantage, to this particular man it was
possible it might appear in another light.  For Jacob knew very
little of Winter and he could not dismiss the weight of past
prejudice.  It seemed impossible that there had never been anything
whatever on the other side, and that his own accumulated tortures and
tribulations were all self-inflicted.  Adam surely must have some
shadowy inkling that he was not a favourite of Bullstone's, and his
conscience must indicate the reason.  Jacob had reached a point of
self-deception from which it was impossible that he could regard
Winter as absolutely innocent in thought.  And that being so, might
not the master of Shipley suspect something lay hidden under the
problem to be presented and the offer to be made?  Might he not, in
truth, guess at the vital reason for Bullstone's approach?

For some weeks Jacob delayed and wearied himself with this problem.
Had he submitted it to Margery, she had instantly solved it: that he
knew; and he knew how she would solve it.  She would assure him that
the last shadows still haunting his mind were unworthy of him and
might well be dismissed.  She would declare his suspicion absurd and
reiterate her assurance that he was putting into the mind of Adam
imaginary ideas which had never entered it.  But along that road was
danger and he had no desire to reveal thoughts that would check
Margery's present happiness or suggest that he was going back on his
word.  She believed him purged.  Then a new fear crowded down upon
him.  For Margery must presently hear of his offer to Adam, and how
would she take it?  If Winter might read into it an inner motive, how
much more certainly would she do so.

Again he hung fire; and then Joseph Elvin died and the need arose for
decision.  In the event of failure, he had already determined what he
would do.  Indeed the alternative entirely satisfied him, and so far
as Owley Farm was concerned, he had very little real difficulty.  All
interested in the matter believed that he was going to allow Robert
Elvin to succeed his father.  If, therefore, Adam Winter declined his
offer of Owley, which was the great step he designed to take--it
would be handed to Robert, in whom Jacob felt complete trust.  Now
one decision solved the problem of Margery, if she and Adam were
honest.  Bullstone decided that none but Winter himself must know of
the offer.  Thus, if he declined it, nobody need be any the wiser,
and things might take the course generally anticipated.  From this
point another move struck upon Jacob's mind, calculated still further
to ensure secrecy so far as everybody but Adam was concerned.  This
came out when the men met on the evening of Joe Elvin's funeral.

Winter, his aunt and many other neighbours, including the Huxams,
Jeremy and his wife, and the party from Red House, saw the dead man
lowered into his grave; and by appointment on the same night, Jacob
visited Shipley Farm to speak with Winter.  He had determined to
offer him Owley and make the way smooth; but he had also determined
that the world must suppose the suggestion, if accepted, had come
from Adam and not himself.  He had everything at his finger ends, and
had so ordered the matter that not Margery knew whither he was bound,
when he left Red House after supper.

Jacob felt confident that his proposals ought to be accepted, for
Owley was a far stronger and larger farm than Shipley.  Its ground
was richer and cleaner, its flocks had direct access to some of the
finest grazing on the moor.  Moreover the house was bigger and better
conditioned, while it stood nearer to Brent and the railway than Mr.
Winter's present habitation.

The men sat together and Jacob wasted no time.  The vital points he
anticipated.

"As for rent," he said, after detailing his suggestions, "I should
will that to be the same as you pay here--no more and no less.  There
are two conditions only: that you take on Bob Elvin, if he would like
you to do so; and that you let it be understood that this suggestion
came from you, not me.  That may sound like craft in your ears; but
the point is this: young Elvin hoped that I would trust him to carry
on, and failing you, I should do so.  I would, however, naturally
prefer a grown and experienced man; and if you come to me and offer
to go there, nobody could question my wisdom in putting you before
the lad.  That's all there is to it; and if you like to go over next
spring, I should be glad."

Nothing but frank gratitude greeted Bullstone's offer.  Adam, as the
rest of the world, knew him for a man who did good things in abrupt
and secret ways, and he regarded the suggestion, that he should
improve his state by taking Owley, as one prompted by nothing but the
good-will of the man who made it.  That he should have put any other
interpretation upon it was impossible.  A kindly man himself, only
prevented by circumstances from generosity, none could have been
quicker to weigh the significance of such a handsome proposal; and
when he replied, after half a minute's silence, he dwelt first on
what he conceived the spirit behind Jacob's speech.

"A mighty good offer and I value it," said Winter.  "I'm over and
above pleased, because it shows your large heart, which didn't want
showing, I'm sure, and also your opinion of me.  We much like to be
rated high by those we rate high ourselves; and you wouldn't have
said such a thing if you hadn't felt Owley was safe with me.  I'm
proud of that."

"So much goes without saying, Winter.  I know you'll do all that can
be done and look after it well enough.  Here at Shipley, it's making
bricks without straw half your time--a thankless grind.  You'd have
an easier and fruitfuller job there."

"I know all that.  I was too set on showing my pleasure to go into
the thing for the minute, and if I had only myself to think on, I'd
take you.  But there's my aunt and brother."

"Well, they'd be a lot more comfortable than at Shipley."

"Just the opposite.  You know how people fit into a place.  My old
woman could no more shift now than a snail out of its shell; and if
Sammy thought he'd got to leave Shipley, he'd have the house out of
windows and make a proper tantara.  Such a thing would throw him over
altogether, I reckon.  It was a terrible business getting him here;
but he was near twenty year younger then."

Jacob regarded him in astonishment.  The objections appeared too
slight to be sincere.

"Surely Samuel would soon get used to the thought," he said.

"Not him," answered Adam.  "His mind--so to call it--hates change
worse than anything; the leastest trifle altered makes him sulky and
wicked for a month.  There's a dangerous side to him none knows but
me.  I assure you I'm telling truth.  I'd go, and mighty glad to do
so; but while Samuel lives, we can't leave here."

He was so definite that argument did not suggest itself to Bullstone.
His mind was soon burrowing in its accustomed channels; and, grasping
the fact that his offer had been declined, he fell into gloom.  He
was full of suspicion at once.  The reason for refusal had come so
pat that it seemed as though Adam were prepared with it.  Yet he
submitted a most frivolous objection.  Jacob had indirectly assured
Winter large increase of prosperity; and was it likely that any
practical man would decline such improved conditions on the plea of
discomfort for a weak-minded brother?

Bullstone began to grow fresh doubts.  It was clear that Adam had no
mind to go beyond the immediate radius of Red House.  Meantime Winter
spoke and reiterated his gratification.

"I shall always remember it," he said, "and I'd like to brag about
it, if I didn't know you'd deny me.  Besides you say it mustn't be
known."

"To nobody," answered Jacob.  "If you've turned down the offer once
for all, I can only say I'm sorry and a bit surprised--especially at
the reason you give.  Your aunt wouldn't have made much fuss if she
knew you were a gainer, and your poor brother could have been
managed, as you well know how to manage him.  However, you say 'no,'
so Bob Elvin shall have it.  But not a word about this to anybody--to
anybody whatever.  I'll ask you to promise that, please."

"Of course.  My word's given."

"Not to any of my people either."

"I quite understand, Bullstone.  And may the chance offer for me to
do you a good turn.  I'd be glad to get it and take it."

"As for that, you've had your chance to-night, and won't take it,"
answered the other, rising.  He refused a drink and went his way.
The night was dark and he dawdled in thought on Shipley Bridge for a
few moments with the din of the river in his ear and one white streak
of the fall, like a ghost, flickering up and down in the blackness of
the rocks beneath.  He was disappointed.  A thousand doubts and
dismays arose from this reverse.  He worked himself into a turmoil
before he reached home, and his native weakness, resolutely opposed
of late, broke from restraint and moved along the old, tormenting
ways.  One fact dominated the situation.  Winter would not go farther
off, despite the immense advantages of so doing.  It followed that to
remain in reality represented for him still greater privileges.

Jacob sank deeper and began to imagine maddening incidents as a
result of this refusal.  He saw Winter secretly relating this story
to Margery.  Perhaps she would laugh at it.  Thus his own defeated
plan liberated the old, insensate terrors and freed a force that
threatened to destroy the fortifications he had lifted with such
toil.  The citadel was undefended again.  Yet, after the first
assault, he came in a measure back to his newer self and strove to
convince his mind that Adam Winter had told the truth.  He tried
desperately hard to make himself believe it, and partially succeeded.

Life at this season demanded much attention.  Special work of
preparation for a big dog show was in hand and John Henry would soon
leave his home for Bullstone Farm.  Margery mourned the pending loss.

"The house won't be the same without him," she said.  But the boy
comforted her.  He was full of energy and hungry to begin serious
work, where some day he would reign as master.

"Don't you fret," he begged his mother.  "I shall visit you of a
Sunday, and I've promised grandmother to go in to chapel very
regular, so we shall meet there, if not here."

They knew they would see but little of him at Red House, however, and
that moved Margery to sorrow.  It was the first empty place, the
first nestling away.  His sisters also regretted the coming change;
but Peter, who had always been overshadowed by John Henry, felt no
great concern.  As for Jacob, he was indifferent.  He knew that his
son did not esteem him, for the lad's character in no way resembled
his own.  He was a bustling, pushing youth, steadfast and of fixed
opinions--a Pulleyblank, as Mrs. Huxam delighted to point out.

Thus stress of circumstances for a time intruded; then, with more
leisure, Jacob's spirit lost ground.  Events aroused disquiet; paltry
incidents were magnified into ominous evils.  He sank to setting
little traps for his wife, but she never fell into them.  She did not
even see them; but he suspected that she had seen them, and waited
for her to protest and express indignation.  Had she done so, he was
prepared.  The fact that she took no notice was set down to cunning
on her part, and it wrought fresh evil within him.  Thus secrecy and
ignorance did their work and Margery, entirely absorbed with the
preparations for her son's departure, existed unaware that her
husband had returned to the darkness of his illusions.  In truth she
was thinking very little about him at this period.  John Henry filled
her thoughts.




CHAPTER XII

ON THE HILL

For the first time Peter Bullstone went to the great annual Cruft's
International Dog Show with Barton Gill.  Jacob exhibited every year,
but very seldom accompanied his dogs to London; and now his son was
allowed the grand experience of "Cruft's."

"You'll soon be old enough to do this work on your own," promised the
boy's father, and Peter set forth, with Mr. Gill to take care, not
only of him, but the six Irish terriers entered to uphold the fame of
Red House.

John Henry was gone to Bullstone Farm, and home to Margery seemed
very empty without him; but she often saw him and he came, at his
father's direction, to Sunday dinner when he could do so.

Then happened an incident steeped in deep emotion for husband and
wife.  It was a quality of Jacob's failure to reason that his life,
down to its most trifling incidents, suffered contamination.  As
existence, even to the least details, will wake the breath of
creative imagination in an artist, so, where a passion has obtained
complete mastery, no minute event of life but is unconsciously passed
through the test of that noble, or vitiated, outlook on all things.
The smallest action challenges the paramount emotion and is
illuminated by that gracious, or evil, light.

Thus, when Jacob Bullstone, upon a February day, saw Adam Winter
strolling up the river valley with his gun on his shoulder, the sight
set fire to thought as usual; and it did more.  An appetite, stilled
of late under press of normal life, had quickened after its rest.  An
ugly idea instantly moved in Bullstone's brain and he resisted it;
then it returned and he attended to it.  His mind worked, until
presently he told himself that the inspiration, suddenly flashed to
him, was good rather than evil.  It sprang adult and powerful.  It
did not grow.  He had plunged into it almost before he knew it was
upon him, and he had taken the first step before considering the
last.  He was swept away; and in five minutes the base thing had been
done, for yielding to sudden, overpowering impulse, he acted.  He
returned from the kennels, told Margery that Adam Winter had gone up
the valley to shoot snipe, and then, after a pause, declared his
intention of visiting a friend at Brent.

"I'm free for the minute and have been owing him a call for a month
of Sundays," he said.  "I'll be back sometime; but you needn't expect
me till you see me."