Judith felt prouder of her own family than her husband's, and a
slight to any member of the clan was an affront upon herself.  A
bachelor brother lived at Plymouth.  He owned trawlers and prospered,
letting it be known that his niece, Margery, would some day inherit
his possessions.  Mrs. Huxam's father, Tobias Pulleyblank, a saddler,
had been dead ten years, and her mother passed a year earlier.  But
other Pulleyblanks still flourished round about.  They lifted
steadfast lights on a naughty world, and nothing had disappointed
Judith Huxam more than to find that Pulleyblank blood was not
pre-potent in the veins of her own boy and girl.  They both lacked
that steel of character and indomitable will power she herself
possessed; and though Margery Bullstone, the elder child, married to
a prosperous man, had done her duty and given her mother just cause
for gratification and contentment, of Jeremy, her son, this could not
be admitted.

It happened that Jeremy Huxam's parents were now dwelling on this
subject, for, upon the following day, Jeremy was due to return home.
Once more he had been tried in the ranks of men and found wanting.

Barlow and his wife were in bed.  They retired early and, as a rule,
conversed for an hour on the interests of the day before sleeping.
When Mr. Huxam stretched his hand for a little box beside him and
took a mucilaginous lozenge for his 'tubes,' that was the signal that
conversation must cease and sleep be sought.

"Jeremy certainly is a puzzling man," he confessed, "and I wish there
was more of you in him and less of me.  He's not altogether soft, and
he's not altogether lazy, and he's always civil spoken and
respectful, and everybody likes him; yet what does he amount to?  A
dead weight on our hands, and no sooner, after unheard-of efforts, do
we launch him into deep water, than he's back on the beach again."

"It's lack of purpose," said Judith.  "He's like one of them ants you
see in the woods.  They'll tug and tug and wander this way and that,
pulling along a scrap of rubbish; and they'll climb up a stone and
fall off a score of times and get no forwarder.  Yet you can't deny
the creatures are busy enough.  Of Jeremy you can only say that he's
himself and made as his Maker willed him to be.  He'll never treat
time like a servant, but let it master him.  That's what our Thomas
understood, though only a child when he died."

"True," answered Barlow, "and seeing that nobody can tell how little
time may be granted them, it's a cruel sight to see the precious
stuff frittered away.  Some fools just kill time--murder it, because
they haven't the brain power to know what to do with it; and such men
ought to be took in hand, like other criminal malefactors, in my
opinion, and set to do the world's work whether they want to or not.
But Jeremy's not like that.  He's wishful to do some good; yet things
all fall to pieces when he touches them."

"Incompetence is the only word for it," said Judith.

"And with competence writ large before his eyes from his youth up!"
mused Barlow.  "Generally it's just the opposite, and you see
children either give their parents away, or offer a good
advertisement for their homes, as the case may be.  A child's
terrible clever at echoing and copying what goes on around him, being
just so remorseless in that matter as a parrot.  They'll pick up the
good, or bad, manners or customs and the general outlook of their
elders, and be a sort of running comment upon their fathers and
mothers to the quick eye that marks 'em; for, unless they are idiots,
children will be learning, and we be teaching 'em something all the
time, whether we want to, or don't.  Yet Jeremy breaks the rule, for
what did he learn except to be hard-working and God-fearing?  And
that unfortunately ain't enough to make a success of life, though, no
doubt, if we were all nearer Christ in thought and deed, as well as
profession, it would be."

"Yes," said Mrs. Huxam.  "No child of mine, or yours, ever gave us
away, because, thank God, there was nothing to give away.  But they
well might have shone a bit brighter in our mortal view.  However,
that's God's affair."

She reviewed her children and took comfort in an interesting
psychological fact.

"So there they stand--Jeremy, a slight man, of good intentions, but
no driving power--and Margery--all right, in the keeping of a man of
character, though I never pretended his character was all I could
wish in the way of religion.  But what shows to me the wisdom of God
so amazing clear is Margery's children.  Three out of the four are
full of Pulleyblank!"

"You may say they have a big pinch," admitted Barlow; "and what does
that amount to?  Why, that the Lord knows a good thing when He sees
it.  The Pulleyblank character has helped to make England what it is,
and if the world of men and women were flooded with it, the Chosen
Few would soon rise up to be the Chosen Many."

"We can't hope that," she answered, "because the Word says 'no'; but
Margery's two boys and her eldest girl have got character, and if
they see enough of us as time goes on, so much the better for them."

"Margery's got character too--she thinks right," declared Mr. Huxam.

"She does--I'm not judging her.  Jacob Bullstone is a difficult man
in some ways, though where she's concerned I don't quarrel with him.
Margery is a very good wife; but she was always fond of pleasure in
season and out; and that's the weakness."

"Well, Bullstone ain't.  By no means a pleasure-loving man; and we
must give him credit in his children also.  They've been brought up
to the dignity of work.  They're not spoiled."

"He'll claim the credit, no doubt; but I shan't be sorry when they're
out in the world."

"The blessing is that they've got what Jeremy never did have," said
Mr. Huxam; "and that's an idea of what they want to do.  John Henry
will be a farmer, and there's no shadow of turning with him, young as
he is.  That's Pulleyblank.  Then Peter's for the dogs.  He'll carry
on his father's business.  They're not particular good scholars, so
schoolmaster tells me, but they'll go to work presently, knowing all
they need to know about learning in general.  And you can get on
without a lot of learning, so called, amazing well.  Then Avis is
handsome and will be married in a few years.  And that only leaves
Auna."

"To call a child after the river was a silly thing, and I never
thought the same of the man after he did it," said Judith.

"It was poetry," explained Barlow.  "And you can't fairly blame him.
Margery loves the river and she would have it so."

"He ought to have withstood her.  My wish was 'Mary.'  We haven't had
a 'Mary' since my aunt died."

"Auna's the living daps of what her mother was at eleven years old,"
continued Mr. Huxam.  "But Jeremy's the matter now.  I'm going to
propose that he sees his brother-in-law as soon as may be.  Jacob
Bullstone will help him for his wife's sake, if it can be done.  He's
always been very well disposed to Jeremy."

"What can he do?"

"Who knows?  We never yet did ask him to lend a hand, and this may be
the appointed time."

Mrs. Huxam was doubtful.

"I shouldn't much wish to be under any obligation in that quarter,"
she said.

"You won't be," he replied.  "It's Jeremy who goes to the man, not
you.  And Jeremy's the sort must be under obligations.  He's built
so.  There's plenty others like him.  They give the stronger
Christians a chance to shine and practise the virtues.  You must have
weak members for the righteous to show their light before men."

He stretched for his jujubes and Judith, heaving a sigh, settled down.


Jeremy Huxam was the sort of son a mother is bound to love, even
though her respect has vanished and her ambition disappeared.  He had
a charming face, charming manners and a sanguine nature, easily
elated and easily cast down.  He was fair, with an amber moustache,
which did not conceal a small and pretty mouth.  He had large, grey
eyes and a trifling forehead, over which hung bright, curly hair.  He
was a sort of womanly edition of Mr. Huxam, but taller and more
gracefully built.  Jeremy attached importance to his clothes and
dressed well.  His voice was gentle and he often laughed.  He was
exceedingly selfish; but he had the knack to please, and had won many
friends, for his own urbane sake as well as his father's.  But new
enterprises, begun in hope, always sank into doubt and ended in
exasperation.  He was an attractive, futile person, and would
continue to be so.

Mrs. Huxam, remembering her own mighty influence for good on her
husband, sometimes thought that, did her son take a wife, the
situation might be saved; but Barlow deprecated any such enterprise
at present, pointing out that the sort of wife Jeremy would be likely
to choose was ill-calculated to fortify his spirit, or strengthen his
footsteps.

Now that opinion of the past echoed with resounding chaos upon his
parents' ears, for Jeremy Huxam returned from Plymouth on the
following day a married man.  It was the second, shattering shock in
the lives of Barlow and Judith.

His father went to meet Jeremy, who emerged from a third-class
carriage on the arrival of the train, and then handed out a very fine
young woman.  He beamed upon Barlow, shook him warmly by the hand and
turned to the girl who stood behind him.

"Jane," he said, "this is my dear father, and now he'll be yours."

Then he introduced his wife.

"A bit of a surprise, father.  You don't remember Jane Parsons, I
expect, daughter of Mrs. Parsons up at Bullstone Farm in the old
days; but she's Jane Huxam now and has honoured me by marrying me.
And, from this great event, there's no doubt my fortunes will change."

Jane Huxam, dark and tall, with a humble expression and a loose
mouth, shook the postmaster's hand very nervously and hoped he would
forgive them.

"We've known each other a longful time," said Jeremy, "and
remembering you thought so well of the Catt family, I was pretty sure
you'd be glad to hear that Jane cared for me.  And it's the turning
point, and it will be like your unfailing kindness, father, if you
take us hopefully before mother, as if you was pleased about it."

"We feel that as man and wife we shall be able to get on a lot better
in the world than separate," explained Jane.  "Nothing will be
difficult to me when I think of Jeremy."

"Same here," declared her husband.  "I always wanted a home-grown
wife, and we're both that fond of Brent that we shall be a lot
happier here.  Jane's properly glad to be back, and I'm very wishful
to find work near you and mother.  I missed you both a lot.  Of
course you'll say that we ought to have told you the glad news, and
you must understand Jane was set on doing so.  But the fault is
entirely mine, dad."

Having said these things hastily, Jeremy went to see after the
luggage, and Mr. Huxam, who had been too astonished to do more than
stare and listen, turned to his daughter-in-law.

"And when you naturally asked my son to let us hear about this, what
reason did he give for refusing?" he inquired.

"Truth's truth, Mr. Huxam," answered Jane, twisting her wedding-ring,
"and I've told him we must speak the truth in everything, else such a
woman as Mrs. Huxam would turn against us.  It's like this.  I was
assistant at a pastry-cook's and, of course, I've known Jeremy since
we were children, and he often came to Bullstone Farm after his
sister married Mr. Jacob.  So we met in Plymouth, and I went with
Jeremy on a steamer, for one of they moonlight excursions to the
Eddystone Lighthouse.  And, coming home, he offered for me, and I
said 'yes.'  Then I was all for telling the great news; but he
wouldn't."

"And why wouldn't he?  There must have been a reason."

"The reason was that he much feared his mother would rise up and
forbid it," said Jane.  "Truth's truth, Mr. Huxam, and I won't begin
my married life with a lie, even if we have to live in a gutter.  He
felt cruel sure that Mrs. Huxam wouldn't like him marrying, though he
never said she wouldn't like me myself.  He felt sure that you would
like me, because you had a very high opinion of my late grandfather,
Mr. Matthew Catt, and of the Catts in general; but he weren't going
to take any risks, and being a man of tender mind, he knew it would
hurt him dreadfully if his mother was to put down her foot against
the match.  And he felt, rather than face such a sad thing as that,
and cause his mother pain, and suffer a lot himself, and perhaps even
be drove to break it off, which would have pretty well killed me--in
a word, Mr. Huxam, he felt 'discretion was the better part of
valour.'  That was his own wise words.  And so we were married quite
lawful and regular in a church, and he's got the lines.  And if love
can make him a success, he'll be one in future.  He's a wonderful man
really."

Jeremy returned.

"Tom Bonus will bring along our two boxes," he said.  "It's very
comforting to see faces you know round about you again, and I hope I
shan't be called to leave Brent no more.  My next job will be tackled
with all the determination of a married man, dad; and, if it suits
me, I shouldn't wonder if I surprised you."

Mr. Huxam began to collect his shattered wits.

"I don't want no more surprises," he answered.  "We'll walk round the
long way, and just let me get law and order into the situation afore
we go home.  I blame you a very great deal; but that's neither here
nor there.  My rule is to face facts and never waste time thinking
how much nicer it would be if they was different.  You're
married--that's the first thing to grasp--and the second and more
important is this that you are now going before your mother, wife in
hand, and your mother don't know what you've done."

"We've come home properly worked up to face the music," said Jeremy.
"United we stand, dad.  We feel that very much indeed; and divided we
should have fallen without a doubt.  But well we know that there's
nothing like the plain, unvarnished truth and----"

"Dry up and listen to me," replied his father.  "As nought else will
serve but the truth in a case like this, it ain't particular
wonderful to hear you say the truth have got to come out.  But why
you hid the truth, you know; and Jane's told me, so I know also.
That's your weak nature, and I'm not troubling myself about you, nor
yet this woman, who may very like be too good for you."

"Far from it, Mr. Huxam," said the young wife.  "With all his faults,
Jeremy's a lot better than me."

"Don't eat humble pie, Jane," said her husband.  "That's a thing that
never pays with mother.  She hates for people to cringe."

"It's your mother and only your mother I'm thinking upon at present,"
continued Barlow, "and according as your mother receives this blow,
so it will be.  At best it must shake her to the roots, because it
shows up a very dark and unexpected side of you.  Cowards are always
cunning, and it don't astonish me so much, because it's well in
keeping with your character to do a thing behind the scenes you
wouldn't dare in the open; but his mother have always had a soft
corner for him, Jane--the only soft corner she ever allowed herself
for anybody--except her Maker--and so this is going to be an
eye-opener for her.  And an eye-opener, where the heart is set,
always happens to be the most painful sort."

"You're speaking without allowing for the great powers of my wife,
dad," murmured Jeremy.

"I am," admitted Mr. Huxam, "because I don't know anything about the
great powers of your wife; but I know the great powers of mine, and
her way of looking at everything; and her principles and her trust in
even Higher Powers than her own."

"Our marriage was made in Heaven, if ever there was one, I'm sure,"
ventured Jane.

"It may, or may not have been.  But Heaven never meant for you to
keep it hid from Jeremy's parents; and if it was made in Heaven, Mrs.
Huxam would have been the last to try and prevent it," answered
Barlow.  "The point for the minute is to break it to her, and I'm
inclined to think I can do that a lot better than my son."

"Devil doubt it!" said Jeremy with great relief.  "It's like your
sense to see that, father.  I quite agree.  I quite agree.  Supposing
Jane and I go for a nice walk and come back home to tea?"

"Do Mrs. Parsons know?" asked Mr. Huxam.

"There again," answered Jeremy.  "We didn't tell her.  Not but well
we know she'll be glad."

"She'll be proud," promised Jane.  "It will be the proudest day of
her life.  She never hoped anything like Jeremy for me, Mr. Huxam.
She knew there were a good few after me, but never thought of your
son."

Mrs. Milly Parsons now dwelt in a cottage by Lydia Bridge, where the
river took a great leap before descending into the meadows and woods
of Brent.  Thankfully Jeremy postponed the supreme moment of the day,
left his father to break the news, implored him to do so in a
friendly spirit and wandered off with his wife up the valley beside
the river.

Then Barlow Huxam returned to his shop, called Judith from behind the
counter for a moment and prepared to tell her what had happened.

"At my wish, Judy, our son has gone up over and won't be back till
tea-time," he began, but Mrs. Huxam stopped him.

"Who is she?" asked Jeremy's mother quite quietly.

Again Barlow felt the solid earth slipping.

"You know?" he asked.

"Two boxes have come, and Bonus brought them," she answered.  "I told
him only one was Jeremy's, and he said very like, but that the other
belonged to his wife."

"It's true.  Wonders never cease in our family--well ordered though
it may be.  The world's to the young, and a proper mess they seem
likely to make of it.  You always thought that marriage would save or
settle Jeremy, and we can only pray that it will save him."

Mrs. Huxam was pale.  She mopped her face quietly with a white
handkerchief and remained silent.

"Don't you take on," he begged.  "Don't let it shake you."

"Does anything shake me?" she asked.  "What right should I have to
stand with the Chosen Few, Barlow Huxam, if anything shook me?  It's
the Lord's will and that's enough."

"There!" he said, "faltering creature that I am, I never thought of
that."

"No--nor yet Jeremy.  But a man don't marry a woman by chance.  It
had to be, and it is.  And who is she?"

"Jane Parsons--child of Milly Parsons by Lydia Bridge, who was
daughter of the late Matthew Catt of Bullstone Farm.  The Lord's
doing and marvellous in our eyes, Judy."

"Things done behind our backs are often marvellous in our eyes, when
we first see them," she answered.  "I shall take this as I take
everything else, Barlow, knowing where it comes from."

"It may be a blessing in disguise.  She's a fine girl and will have
her mother's little bit of money.  Farmer Catt left just in sight of
four figures.  They'll be here to tea.  They're full of resolutions."




CHAPTER II

AT RED HOUSE

Jeremy and his wife went to dinner at Red House a week after their
return home.  His marriage afforded mild entertainment to those who
knew him.  Some felt sanguine, others prophesied confusion and
failure on a larger scale than he had yet achieved.

As they walked through a June morning, Jeremy explained to Jane that
Jacob Bullstone was a man of affairs and might be expected to help
them.

"Not so much for my sake as Margery's," he admitted; "but he's a
wonderful husband to her, and she will have been at him already I
expect.  My sister's delighted that I'm married, and no doubt will
feel that now is the time for my real friends to come forward."

Jane, also of a sanguine temperament, echoed his hopes.  She loved
him so much that it seemed hard to suppose the world would deny such
a man his opportunity.

As they neared Red House, they overtook an ancient man walking slowly
before them.

"It's William Marydrew," said Jane.  "He was often up over at
Bullstone when Grandfather Catt lived.  A proper old figure of fun."

They saluted Billy, who walked with a stick and smoked a clay pipe.
He was bent and travelled slowly.  He had snow-white whiskers, which
met under his chin, and a red, crinkled face with a cheerful
expression.  His eyes were small and he blinked and saw badly, for
they were weak.  Jane told him that she was married, and he said he
had heard about it, but other matters had caused the fact to slip his
memory.

"May you be a happy pair and find life go very suent," he hoped.

Billy seemed, however, not so cheerful as of old.

"I trust you find yourself well," said Jane.

"Very well indeed, my dear," he answered.  "If I be allowed to go my
own pace and eat my own food, I don't feel a pang.  Threatened
blindness be my only cloud so far as the body is concerned.  By
ninety I shall be so blind as a mole.  And yet what odds?  Even so, I
shall have had the use of my eyes for a quarter of a century more
than most folk."

"You'm a thought downcast, Mr. Marydrew," ventured Jane.  "I always
remember you as a great laughter-maker in my grandfather's time."

"So I was then, and so I will be again," he promised.  "I'm a funny
old blid--for why?  I never look back and be naturally of a hopeful
turn of mind.  But just now, owing to a very fatal accident, I'm
under the weather for the moment."

"If there's anything in the world I could do," said Jeremy.

"No, my dear, there's nothing you can do.  You see I've just closed
the eyes of my only daughter.  Mercy Marydrew's gone to her reward."

"Good Lord, your famous daughter dead!" exclaimed Jane.

"Died at the Cottage Hospital at half after ten," answered the old
man.  "And being myself mortal, I'm under a cloud for the minute.
Not for her--not for her.  There never was such a huckster in these
parts as Mercy and never a better saleswoman."

"She had a great renown in Plymouth market," declared Jane.

"Yes--a renowned woman for a spinster.  And she counted to work for
another five years and then retire.  But there comed a growth--one of
they cursed things that creeps into the flesh unbeknownst.  You feel
all right for a bit, but death's burrowing in your vitals all the
time; and then you be cut down and wither away."

"I hope she didn't suffer much," said Jeremy.

"I hope she didn't," answered Mr. Marydrew.  "I know she's left me
her savings, God bless her; but I'd a lot sooner she'd been at my
death-bed, than I'd been at hers."

"You'll meet again before so very long," murmured Jane.

"A cheering thought," admitted the old man.  "Yes, we shall come
together in a few years, though I dare say that good woman's bit of
money will keep me here longer than you might suppose.  She knew very
well I wouldn't waste it.  I'm sorry for the parish that she's gone.
The farms will look in vain for a huckster like her.  The honestest
woman ever I knew, after her mother."

"A very great loss indeed," said Jeremy.

"Yes, so it is then.  You can judge a dead person pretty much by the
hole they make when they drop out.  Some don't make no hole--I
shan't, and I dare say you won't; but others was so useful to the
neighbours and such a tower of strength, that when they go, you most
wonder how things will be without 'em."

"There's Owley Cot will be empty for one thing," said Jane.

"Yes, it will; and if bricks and mortar could be sorry for
themselves, I dare say her house would grieve."

They had come to a cottage near Shipley Bridge, the home of Mr.
Marydrew.

"The funeral moves on Monday at noon," he said, "and there will be a
pretty good rally of neighbours I expect."

"Everybody of any account will go," declared Jeremy.  "She was a most
popular woman."

"Them that respect themselves did ought to go," answered Billy, "let
alone them that respected her.  And if you're going to Red House,
break the news and tell Jacob I'll be pleased to hear his sympathy.
I'm very old for a blow like this, and 'tis no good pretending I
don't feel cruel cast down, because I do."

"And it will get worse, when you grasp it," foretold Jane.  "I know
it will."

"It's got to get worse afore it gets better," admitted Billy.  "I'm
quite prepared to face that.  And tell Jacob to look me up in my
misfortune if you please.  He won't need to be told twice."

They left him, entered a grassy plateau beside the river, where
towered ruins of old clay works, and so proceeded toward Red House.

They talked concerning Mr. Marydrew's loss and the familiar figure of
his busy daughter.  Then they noticed a boy fishing in the river.  He
was a sturdy, hatless youngster clad in patched, grey tweeds, with a
mourning band on his left arm.

"That's John Henry," said Jeremy, "Margery's eldest."

"What's he got a mourning band on for?" asked Jane, and he explained
that Jacob's mother had died during the previous winter.

They passed into the shadowy stillness of the fir wood and soon
emerged before Red House.  The contours of the place were unchanged,
save for that gradual growth of tree and shrub which escapes the
human eye; but in certain particulars there were alterations; the old
severity of outline was gone; there was less tidiness and more
beauty, for there had come children and flowers.  Margery loved
flowers and the plantings of her first wedded year, greatly
prospering, now climbed Red House to its roof and increased on the
river banks.  Where roses and bright blossoms could grow, she had
planted them; and they had passed over the river also and mantled the
borders.  They intruded into the vegetable patches and so greatly
increased that Jacob sometimes grumbled and uprooted.  Where Margery
might set a climbing rose, a tiger lily, a lupin or a larkspur, she
had done so.  There were clumps of chrysanthemums for autumn, and the
grass and river sides were sowed with daffodil and crocus for the
spring.  This colour flashed in stars and sprays upon the hedges and
by the paths, while in the little garden, once a plat of grass and no
more, now opened many flower beds that broke the green.  Even to the
kennels she had gone and roses now hid many of the iron bars.  She
declared that her passion was for children, flowers and company; and
of these she lacked not the children, or the bloom.

Margery, in a white gown and a dark blue sunbonnet, met her brother
and his wife and kissed them both.  Now she was thirty-four and a
woman of fine presence, yet slight as in her girlhood and delicately
fashioned.  She was healthy, but not physically strong.  Her eyes
told no secrets but gazed untroubled at the world.  None wholly
enjoyed her confidence and she spoke ever of her good fortune, never
concerning any thorn that might be conceded.  Thus she was believed
to be a woman wholly happy, and indeed enjoyed her share of
happiness.  The delight of a secret had lately lent sauce to
existence; for she, and she alone, was in Jeremy's confidence and had
heard of his betrothal and marriage.

She greeted them with kindly laughter, chid them for a brainless
couple and hoped that her brother would at last find work worthy of a
married man and within his power to accomplish.

Jeremy felt no doubt of it.  He prattled to Avis and Auna, his little
nieces, while Margery turned her attention to Jane.

"I shall always care a lot for you," she said frankly, "first for
your husband's sake, then for a reason you forget, but I do not.  I
mind you as a little one fifteen years ago, when my husband made
holiday before I was married, and took me to Bullstone Farm.  That
was a great day in my life--my first treat with Jacob."

"I remember you very well," answered Jane.  "I've told Jeremy I've
never forgot you, and I had a bit of your wedding-cake, that mother
brought home from the Huxams.

"And what about your wedding-cake?"

"We didn't have anything like that.  Jeremy was so properly anxious
to get the deed done that we rushed it.  Mrs. Huxam's forgiven us,
because she says we were in Higher Hands, and that if the Lord hadn't
wanted it to happen, it wouldn't have; but my mother feels it was a
good bit of a slight to keep it dark, and thinks Jeremy was undutiful
and didn't pay me enough respect.  But what does it all matter?"

"Not a bit," declared Jeremy's sister.  "He's as good as gold, though
a bit faint-hearted.  You'll have to make him take himself more
serious, Jane."

John Henry interrupted them.  He returned with two small trout, which
his mother faithfully promised to eat; and then came Peter from the
kennels.

"They are praying for the holidays to come," said Margery.  "My boys
both hate their books you must know; and Jacob don't care over-much,
because they're both so clear in their minds what they're wishful to
be."

"That's a great thing," said Jane.

"It is then."

Peter resembled his father, while John Henry was said to be like his
grandfather Bullstone.  Both, so Jacob held, were true
Bullstones--strong, self-reliant and determined.  They grew fast,
worked harder at home than at school, and longed for the time when
they might begin life seriously--the elder on the land, the younger
at his father's business.

"Peter's got the love of dogs in him on both sides," explained
Peter's mother, "for I always did love the creatures, and so does
Jacob; and John Henry loves farming."

Her husband, for whom they waited, appeared, and calling Jeremy, who
strolled in the garden with his nieces, they went in to dinner.

Jacob Bullstone had grown stouter, but he was very active still and
did the work of a man of fifty without sparing himself.  His dark
hair began to grizzle and his face showed lines, but he preserved his
health, lived in the old way and as yet indulged none of the
temptations of middle life.

He chaffed Jeremy, but was in an amiable mood.

"You haven't changed him yet I see," he said to Jane, while he
sharpened a knife and prepared to carve a round of beef.

"I had to bring Auna and Avis a present of course," declared Jeremy.
"They believe in their uncle, they do; and you've got to encourage
people who believe in you."

The girls had shown their father two little brooches.

"Well, we shall see rare sights now no doubt," said Jacob.  "With
Jane here to guide the helm, you'll soon astonish us.  How did your
mother-in-law welcome you, Jane?"

"Like the wonderful Christian she is," answered Jeremy's wife.
"Kissed me on the forehead and said a few Bible words."

For a considerable time Jeremy and Jane had to listen to the affairs
of their prosperous relations.  They were good listeners and praised
all they heard.  Of the children only Avis talked.  She was a bold,
handsome girl full of self-confidence.  Then Margery bade her sons
declare their ambitions and Jacob tried to make Auna talk, but she
was very shy.  She sat by her father, a thin, dark maiden, with
beautiful eyes and delicate little hands.  Jacob devoted a good deal
of his time to her and tempted her to eat.  They whispered together
sometimes.  Margery watched them under her lids, smiling.  She knew
that Auna was dearer to her husband than the other three children put
together, and, in secret to her alone, he did not deny it.

"She's you again," he would say.

But Margery was not jealous for the boys.  Them she set highest, and
of them John Henry came first.

When the meal was done, the children departed and Jacob rambled on
concerning them until Margery brought up the subject of her brother.

"Now let's talk about these young people," she said.  "For though
you're thirty, Jeremy, you're terrible young still--hardly wife-old,
I should have reckoned."

"I'm young in heart and old in experience," vowed Jeremy.  "I've got
to a pitch when I know very well what I can't do, and am set on
finding something I can."

"I was talking to Adam Winter about you but yesterday," continued
Margery.  "He's a man in a small way, but sensible and----"

Jacob interrupted her.

"Sensible no doubt.  All your friends are sensible I'm sure; but your
brother's come to hear me I believe."

Margery did not answer.  Indeed she did not speak again; but she
smiled to herself and Jacob also smiled.  It was an unreal smile on
both faces.

"I'm not going to do anything on the land," explained Jeremy.  "I
proved pretty clearly five years ago that I wasn't cut out for the
land."

Jacob chaffed him again.

"Lord knows what you are cut out for--excepting a failure," he said.

"Granted," answered Jeremy; "but that was when I went into life
single-handed.  Lots of chaps are failures before they are married;
then, afterwards, they shine out and surprise everybody."

"I've had you in mind.  Old Miss Marydrew is going home pretty fast
and she'll leave a gap.  I don't say you can fill it, and
single-handed you certainly could not; but along with Jane you might."

Jeremy looked at Jane.

"If I hadn't forgot!" he said.  "We met Billy Marydrew back-along,
outside his house, and he was just come from his daughter.  She's
dead, and he was very wisht about it."

"Dead!" said Margery.  "Poor Mercy gone!"

"Yes, and William wanted it to be told here, and hoped that Mr.
Bullstone would step over," added Jane.

"You ought to have told me before," declared Jacob.  "That man is a
dear old friend of mine.  The sanest, biggest-hearted soul that ever
I knew, and much to me ever since I was a child.  He'll think I'm
hanging back, just because you bird-witted people forgot to tell me."

He rose, but spoke again before he departed.

"Mercy Marydrew was a huckster.  She went round in her little cart
and collected butter, eggs and poultry from the farms for Plymouth
market.  And to market she went with her baskets, every Friday of her
life for thirty years.  Now think of it, Jeremy.  How if you did her
job round about, and Jane went to market."

"To drive about in the open air!  The dream of my life!" said Jeremy.

"You always say it's the dream of your life, when a new opening is
found for you," laughed his sister.

"Think of it seriously," urged Jacob.  "This also means that Owley
Cot, my little house by Owley Farm, is on my hands, and there you'll
be in the heart of your job with the farms all around you.  But it's
up to Jane more than you.  Whether she'll make a good market-woman is
the question.  Now I must be gone for an hour and see that poor chap.
This will hit him harder than he thinks for.  I'll be back before you
leave."

"I can't find words to thank you," declared Jeremy, "but I'll show it
in deeds, Jacob.  To have my own trap and drive about in the open
among my neighbours!  It's almost too good to be true."

They turned to Margery and praised her husband when he was gone.

"It's wonderful how life opens out after you're married," said Jane.

"It does," admitted Margery.  "It opens but, as you say, Jane, and
shows you all sorts of things you never dreamed.  And it also shows
how every little bit of happiness carries its own worm in the bud.
However, you'll find that out for yourself.  You know Owley Cot well
enough of course?"

"Loved it ever since I was a child," answered Jane.  "Mr. Elvin's old
mother lived there; and when she died, a game-keeper and his wife was
there for a bit; then Miss Marydrew rented it from your husband."

"And nobody ever had a better tenant.  She did her part and Jacob did
his, and I did mine, which was to plant a lot of roses and nice
flowers in the garden.  You'll find it perfect, for she had a trick
to make everything about her look flame new all the time.  A very
clever woman and Joe Elvin will miss her, for she was one of the
hopeful ones, like her old father, and cheered the man up.  He's a
grizzler--born so, yet no call to be.  He's had his share of luck and
Jacob says he's pretty snug, but his health's bad."

"I remember Owley Cot," declared Jeremy.  "I used to go up to Owley,
to kill rats with my ferret when I was a boy, and I was very friendly
with Joe's son, Robert."

"Robert's going to make a better man than Joe," said Margery.  "A
very nice boy, and seeing his father's so melancholy, he's fought shy
of it, and takes a bright view.  Jacob says he'll be a tip-top farmer
presently."

"Joe used to be kind to me, because he respected mother such a
lot--and father," declared Jeremy.

"He's kind to everybody in his mournful way," answered Margery; "but
he'd always sooner go to a funeral than a wedding, and when he opens
the paper of a morning, so Robert tells me, he always says, 'And who
are the lucky ones?'  Then you find he's reading the deaths.  Yet
nobody would hate dying more than him."

Jeremy was full of his prospects.  He always expatiated over any new
scheme and saw manifold possibilities.

"Of course I'm the last to build castles in the air, or anything like
that," he declared, "but, all the same, if only Jacob can lend a hand
here with the house and a trap and a horse, he certainly won't regret
it.  An energetic man like me, with a good horse, should be able to
do far greater rounds than poor Miss Marydrew, and I'd work up a
connection among the farms for miles and miles round.  Then, luckily
Jane is used to a shop, and in the market she would do wonders and
get all Miss Marydrew's old custom with a lot added.  In course of
time--probably a very short time--I should pay Jacob's kindness back
with large interest, you may be certain.  In fact the idea hasn't a
weak spot that I can see."

"There's got to be a new huckster for certain," said Jane.  "It's not
man's work as a rule; but I've known men to do it for their wives."

"It's man's work the way I shall do it," promised Jeremy.  "And I
shouldn't wonder if I couldn't beat up a good few customers in
Plymouth myself when they hear of this.  I made a lot of nice friends
there."

"Uncle Lawrence might come to you," suggested Margery.  She referred
to her mother's brother, Mr. Lawrence Pulleyblank, an owner of
fishing trawlers and a man after his sister's own heart.

Jeremy's face fell.

"I'm sorry to say it, but Uncle Lawrence doesn't like me very much.
You see he got me that last billet, that failed through no fault of
mine; and after he found I was giving up and coming home, he said
some strong things.  But you are all the world to Uncle Lawrence,
Margery, and when he hears of this new and much more important step
I'm taking, no doubt, if you dropped a word, he'd buy his butter and
eggs and so on off me and Jane."

"I'm sorry you fell out with him,"  said Margery.

"I didn't--I didn't," answered her brother.  "I don't fall out with
anybody.  It was his natural disappointment that I didn't shine in
the artificial manure works.  He'll always say it was because I was
weak and couldn't stand the smells.  He hasn't got a nose himself,
else he wouldn't live on the Barbican.  But I respect him very much
and I hope he'll live to respect me.  He's looking forward to your
visit as usual."

Lawrence Pulleyblank, an old bachelor, regarded Margery as his
special joy.  She visited him every year, and always took a child
with her.

"It's the turn of Peter," she said, "and we go down in August."

"To think of Owley Cot!" murmured Jane.  "Too good to be true in my
opinion.  Its little windows catch the morning light, and the
chimney's covered with ivy.  Great fir trees with red stems grow over
it and there's an upping-stock for horsemen outside the gate."

"You won't know it for roses now," answered Margery.  "Poor dear
Mercy Marydrew--her heart used to sink when I came along with some
new flowers dug up from here.  She was all for tidiness, and I do
think flowers gave her more pain than pleasure."

"I like them and I'll tend them well," promised Jane.

Her sister-in-law, regarding her with side glances, perceived that
she was possessed of childish charm.  She was a pleading sort of
girl--just the type sure to win Jeremy's affections.

"My own impression is that it's going to mean big money from the
first," said the future huckster.  "I'm itching to be at it; and I'm
very hopeful it may be possible to secure some of Miss Marydrew's
furniture, so we can go into Owley Cot as soon as Jacob likes.
Father would help there."

"And we shan't fear to rough it neither," continued Jane.  "We've
said to each other, scores of times, that we don't mind how hard life
is, so we share it together."

"Not hard for you, however," promised Jeremy.  "I'm the one to bear
the battle and come between you and everything.  That's what I'm here
for."

Then they went to look at the kennels.

The family reassembled at tea, and Jacob, who had spent an hour with
Mr. Marydrew, declared that he was bearing up exceedingly well.

"Too sensible to lose his balance under any trouble," he said.

Bullstone found that Jeremy had already undertaken the new work in
spirit and was actually thriving at it, saving money and repaying his
debts.

"Trust me," he said, "and be sure of this, that I shall return good
measure well pressed down, Jacob.  This is the chance of a lifetime,
and something tells me my foot is now firm on the ladder."

They parted presently, and while Auna and Avis accompanied them for a
mile on their return journey to Brent, Margery thanked her husband.

"It's like you; I'm sure I'm deeply obliged; and father and mother
will feel as grateful as I do," she said rather formally.

Jacob laughed.

"For you and yours I do it.  But don't be too hopeful.  Jeremy isn't
built to help on the world--only to be helped on by it."

"Perhaps now he's married----"

"Yes, yes, he'll try valiantly--a most well-meaning chap--but you
can't ask putty to take the place of lead.  I'll push him and do what
I may; and so will you.  If manners could make him, he'd be all
right; but he's like your rose-bushes--wants a lot of tying up and
supporting."




CHAPTER III

BARTON GILL UNDER NOTICE

The mind of Barton Gill was exercised, for he had heard painful news
and suddenly learned the unsuspected opinion of another man
concerning him.  He felt shocked and cast down, having never guessed
that Jacob Bullstone contemplated the possibility which now
confronted Mr. Gill as a fact.

Barton was sixty-eight and, in his own opinion, as active and
apprehensive as ever.  Looking back he perceived that he had actually
outgrown some weaknesses of middle age; while with respect to his
knowledge of dogs, no man could deny that it embraced everything of
importance.

Returning from Brent, the kennel-man fell in with Adam Winter and
revealed his troubles.

"Hast heard the black news, Adam?" he began.  "But of course you have
not.  It only burst upon me yesterday."

"Can it be bettered, or is it one of they fatal things beyond
repair?" asked Winter.

It was his solid custom on all occasions to help if harm might be
averted, but not to fret unduly at evil accomplished.

"Whether it's going to be fatal remains to be seen; but I don't feel
an ounce of hope," said Gill.  "In a word--Jacob Bullstone.  You know
his way.  He'll store his thoughts, and smile, and hide what's moving
in his head from every eye but his Maker's; and then, when the deed
is ripe, he'll do it.  And so half his actions come upon people as a
great surprise, because they never get a wink of what was leading up
to 'em."

"He's always got his reasons, however," argued Adam.

"He may have, or he may not.  And it's all one, anyhow, since he
never feels called to give 'em.  But in my case there ain't a shadow
of reason.  He's built up a very wrong and mistaken picture of me.
He's watched me in secret, which ain't a manly thing to do, and now,
like a thunder planet, he's fallen upon me and given me the sack!"

"My stars!  You going?"

"Under notice; but never any warning in the rightful sense of the
word," explained Barton Gill.  "I've been doing my work in season and
out at Red House for half a century, and putting the dogs before
everything but God Almighty, and helping to make 'em the world-famous
creatures they be.  And full of zeal for the family, and pouring my
knowledge into young Peter.  And now to be flung out."

"Why for, Barton?"

"Well may you ax that.  For no reason on earth but because I'm too
old!  And only sixty-eight by this hand, and I wish I may die if a
year more."

Adam was cautious.  He felt very little doubt that Jacob Bullstone
knew his own business best.  They had been neighbours for fifteen
years and, so far as Winter knew, Jacob regarded him as a good
neighbour.  They had never quarrelled and not often differed.  Indeed
they met but seldom and Adam saw Margery Bullstone far oftener than
her husband.  He had been good to her children and regarded himself
as an old friend of the family; but his relations with Bullstone were
not intimate.

"What you say about Bullstone's character is very interesting,
Barton," he replied.  "There are some men that do things on a sudden
and hide the reasons.  But, if you look, you'll often find, after
your surprise dies down, that there's nothing much to be surprised
about.  I'm sorry if you wanted to stop on.  Perhaps, if you was to
be content to sing second to a younger man and just milk the goats
and potter about for smaller money, he'd be content."

"You say that?  Why, that's what he offered me!"

"Not the sack then?  You told me you were flung out."

Gill shook his head impatiently.

"You don't know my character seemingly, though you ought to by now.
But Bullstone does know it, and well he knows I'd not bide under a
younger kennel-keeper.  I stop as head man, else I don't stop.  And
this I say, that to see your faithful life's work forgot is a sad
sight.  He did ought at least to be decent and let me die in harness,
before he talks of changes and new-fangled notions.  What the hell
more do he want than first prizes again and again, and four awards in
the last ten years for the best dog in the show?"

"Youth will be served," said Winter.  "I see it more and more.  I'm
forty-six and not done with yet; but it's no good pretending the
younger men don't know more than us.  They've got what we can give
them, because they're always welcome to our knowledge; but they've
got much more than that, along of education, and I'll bet there's
scores of men ten and fifteen years younger than me, who know more
about the latest in farming; and, of course, there's scores know more
than you about the latest in dogs."

"You're a very poor-spirited creature to say so then, and I don't
think none the better of you for it," replied Gill warmly.  "I ban't
one to throw up the sponge before youth, I promise you.  I understand
the wilful ways of youth a darned sight too well.  Hot-headed
toads--always dashing at things, to show off their fancied
cleverness, and then coming to us, with their tails between their
legs, to make good their mistakes.  You might just so soon say a
puppy's wiser than his sire, than tell me the youths know more than
us."

"It's nature," argued Winter.  "When we stand still, the younger ones
have got to pass us by.  And, to the seeing eye, that's the first
thing middle age marks--that the young men go past.  We think we be
trudging along so quick as ever; but we are not.  And as for your
life's work, you've done your duty we all know and done it very well.
You was born to work and you've worked honest and helped on the world
of dogs in your time; but nothing stands still and dogs will improve
beyond your knowledge no doubt.  So I should be dignified about it
and go.  Nought lasts, and youth's the flood that's always making to
drown all."

Barton Gill considered these sentiments, but did not approve of them.

"I had it in mind to ax you to put in a word for me," he answered;
"but I see I can't.'

"Not very well, Barton.  I don't know enough about it, and nobody has
a right to come between master and man."

"Everybody's got a right to throw light on another's darkness.
Bullstone's wrong.  He might so soon give his right hand notice as
me.  He's got to take me as an accepted law of nature, and he's
worked himself into a silly fancy that a younger man would be what I
am, and even more.  But it's ignorance; and if I took him at his word
and went, he'd be calling out for me on his knees in a week."

"Then you ought to be hopeful," said Adam.  "If that was to happen,
you'd come back with a flourish of trumpets."

"I don't want no flourish of trumpets and I don't want to go,"
declared the other.  "It's very ill-convenient and unchristian thing
to fire me now, and I hope Bullstone will see sense before it's too
late."

Adam Winter had some experience of the tyranny of old servants and
perceived that the kennel-man was not going to leave Red House if he
could stop there.

"What does Mrs. Bullstone say?" he asked.  "She's a very clever
woman."

"For a woman she is," admitted Gill; "and when she calls home what
I've been to her young people, I make no doubt she'll see that a very
improper thought have come to master.  But I haven't sounded her as
yet and she may not have the pluck to take my side."

"What did you say to Bullstone?"

"Nothing so far.  He burst it on me, as I tell you, and left me and
my stomach wambling with the shock.  I couldn't let down my dinner
after, for the troubled mind tells upon the body instanter.  I just
axed him if I'd heard aright, and he said I had; and since then I've
been turning it over."

They had reached the gate of Shipley Farm on the east bank of Auna,
and Adam stood a moment before entering.

"Well, I dare say it will straighten out.  Look all round it.  You've
only got yourself to think of; and if you was to retire, you'd enjoy
a restful time, and the respect due to you, and not be sorry to find
yourself idle with your work well done."

"I'm not going," answered Barton.  "One word's as good as a thousand,
and unless the man uses force, I don't go.  I've set the age of
seventy-five for retirement, and I don't break my word to myself for
fifty Bullstones."

In this determined mood he crossed the bridge and proceeded sulkily
homeward.  A thought struck him and he turned and shouted it back to
Adam.

"A man's home is his home, ain't it?  And who the devil's going to
turn me out of my home?"

Adam did not answer, but laughed to himself.  He was still laughing
when he entered his kitchen, where his aunt, Amelia Winter, and his
brother, Samuel, had just begun their tea.

"I didn't expect you back so soon, my dear," he said to the old woman.

"And I didn't expect to be home so soon," she answered, "and, what's
more, I came too soon for my peace, for if I hadn't gone up Church
Lane when I did, I shouldn't have seen a very sad sight."

Amelia had worn well.  She was upright and stout and strong--the
youngest of the party, as Adam always declared.  The men resembled
each other.  Samuel was but a few years older than his brother and
Adam stood to him for divinity.  He echoed his opinions and bestowed
upon him absolute trust.  Nothing his younger brother could do was
wrong.  Sammy's mental eccentricities were considered quite harmless
and they had seldom as yet made him a danger to the community.  If he
ever displayed a spark of passion, it was at any adverse criticism of
Adam, and this weakness on his part--once actually manifested, when
he fell tooth and nail upon another labourer for laughing at his
brother over some trifle--was now respected.  In person Samuel
appeared a larger edition of Adam, but of gaunt expression and
already grey.  He was very strong and laboured like a horse.  Work
kept his mind sweet.

"And what might you have seen to shock you, Aunt?" asked the master
of Shipley.

"A sorry sight," she answered.  "You mind poor Miss Marydrew's famous
hat with the red squirrel's tail?  It was a well-known feature--a
proper landmark round about; and to-day I've seen it on another
woman's head, and you might have knocked me down with a feather.
That any female could have the front to flaunt that well-known
trophy!  And such a female!  Sarah Saunders if you please.  Properly
indecent I call it."

"Her sale fetched very good prices," said Adam.  "Old William kept a
few of the best things for his house; but they say he's cleared
something better than sixty pounds by it."

"He oughtn't to have sold her clothes, and I've told him so,"
answered Amelia.  "Clothes are sacred to the wearer in my opinion,
and I'd so soon have seen Mercy's ghost as her hat on that wicked
head.  It won't bring no luck to anybody concerned."

Adam told how Barton Gill was under notice, and his aunt thought it a
hard thing.  Samuel waited to hear his brother's opinion, and echoed
it.

"Gill's worn out and did ought to make room for a younger man," he
said.

He spoke very slowly in a very deep voice.

"Did Mrs. Kingwell's cow come to 'Turk'?" asked Adam.

"She came," answered his brother.

Then the men went out to their evening labours.

No great prosperity marked the farm, but Adam was not ambitious and
his future hopes only extended to his brother.  He desired to see
Samuel safely through life and never at the mercy of unfriendly or
indifferent hands.  His own needs were of the simplest.  He had
abandoned any wish to wed, or raise up a family.  He was content and
his life went uneventfully forward, brightened by various
friendships.  He was well liked but not well known.  To more
full-blooded and energetic men he seemed shadowy; yet none ever heard
him say a foolish thing.  His neighbours knew him for a capable
farmer, but they wondered why he stopped on year after year at a
place which offered such small opportunity for enterprise as Shipley.
Others, however, explained this seclusion as accepted on Samuel's
account.  Samuel was happier in loneliness.




CHAPTER IV

ON SHIPLEY BRIDGE

The subconscious work of grievances and the secret attrition of their
fret are dangerous.  Margery Bullstone harboured such an ill, and it
had wrought inevitable modification of character, for sense of
personal wrong, if indulged, must mar quality.  She was barely
conscious of this buffet, and when she thought upon her life, assured
herself that its compensations and disillusions were fairly balanced,
for she loved her husband and tried to keep his fine characteristics
uppermost in her mind; but she liked him less than of old and her
grievance appeared in this: that he hindered her and came between her
and many innocent pleasures which would have made her life fuller and
happier.  She did not understand Jacob save in flashes, and was dimly
aware of perils in his nature and chambers, hidden in his heart,
which held danger.  He told her often that he held no secrets from
her, and perhaps he believed it.  Regarding temporal matters--his
success or failure, his money, his possessions, his plans--it was
emphatically true.  He liked her to know how he stood, to share his
hopes, to sympathise in his disappointments.  But this was not all,
and Margery knew that in the far deeper secrets of character and
conviction, she had not entered the depth of her husband's mind and
never would.  He was a warm-hearted man and yet, under the warmth,
flowed currents hidden from every eye.  Sometimes, more by accident
than intention, she had dipped for a moment into these currents, been
chilled and found herself glad to ascend into the temperate region of
their usual communion.  She knew he was jealous, yet he seldom said a
word to prove it.  But she understood him well enough to read his
silences and they were unspeakably pregnant.  They would sometimes
last for several days and frighten her.  She had known bitter weeks
when Jacob addressed no living thing but the dogs.  Then the darkness
would drift off and his steadfast and not uncheerful self shine out.
Sometimes she was able to discover a reason for such eclipse;
sometimes, puzzle as she might, no cause occurred to her mind.  If
she approached him, expressed grief for his tribulation and prayed to
share it, he would put her off.  Then she felt the cause, if not the
fault, was in herself.

"If you don't know the reason, then no doubt there's no reason," was
a cryptic answer he often made, and it left her dumb.  She was
conscious of a strange sense that somebody beside her husband dwelt
unseen at Red House--somebody who watched and noted, but made no
comment.  The unseen expressed neither pleasure nor displeasure, but
concentrated upon her and chronicled her actions and opinions.  Jacob
seemed to be two personalities, the one obvious, trustworthy,
affectionate, the other inscrutable, attentive, vigilant.  If one
Jacob praised her and seemed to come closer, so that she felt happy,
then arose the consciousness of the other Jacob, concerning whom she
knew so little, and whose attitude to herself she could not feel was
friendly.  Had she been able to put a name to it, or analyse her
husband's second self, she might have felt easier in some directions;
but as yet she had failed to understand.  Nor could anybody help her
to do so.  Perhaps Judith Huxam came nearest to explaining the
obscurity.  But she refused to give it a name, though her suspicion
found vent in cautions to Margery.

Jacob was not secretive in many things, and a habit of his, quite
familiar to his wife, might have helped towards elucidation had she
been of a synthetic bent.  He would sometimes himself harbour
grievances for days and then plump out with them.  They were
generally of a trivial appearance in Margery's eyes, and she often
wondered at the difference between the things that annoyed a woman
and perturbed a man.  He was obstinate and had his own way as a
matter of course.  She never opposed him, and where alternatives of
action presented themselves, Jacob decided; but some things happened
that she felt were a permanent bruise to him.  They grew out of life
and struck the man in his tenderest part.  None was responsible for
them and they rose from material as subtle and intangible as heredity
and character.  Margery granted that they were very real facts and
would have altered them for her husband's sake had it been possible
to do so; but to alter them was not possible, for they rooted in the
souls of the four children now swiftly growing up at Red House.

Jacob was a good father, and coming to paternity when already
advanced in manhood, he had devoted more personal time and attention
to his children, their nurture and formation of character, than a
younger parent might have done.  From the first Margery perceived
that the upbringing of her brood would lie in the will of their
father; and since she had cared for him better and glorified him mere
during the years when they were born than now, she had not differed
from his opinions, even when sometimes prompted from her parents'
home to do so.  But chance, as though conscious of Jacob's jealousy
and his overmastering desire to dominate by love of his children and
his wife, had flouted this passion and denied him love.

At first the case centred with Margery herself, and while his boys
and girls were little children, he had almost resented the abundant
worship they bestowed upon her rather than him; but now the situation
had developed, though they were still too young to hide their
predilections.  Nor did they turn to their father, as he expected the
boys at least to do.  They had declared frank affection where least
he expected it.  Their mother was indeed first, and then came in
their regard not Jacob, but their grandparents; and he found to his
surprise that the Huxams attracted his sons and eldest daughter.  It
puzzled him, even angered him; but he rarely exhibited his secret
annoyance and never to any but Margery.

He was scornful to her occasionally and she admitted, or professed, a
kindred astonishment.  Indeed she did not know why the boys had not
naturally turned to their father, since there existed no reason in
his treatment of them to lessen natural affection.  He was kind and
generous.  He supported their youthful hopes and ambitions; he went
further in that direction than Margery herself; for she had desired
higher education for John Henry and Peter, while their father, to her
disappointment, held it worthless, seeing the nature of their hopes
and abilities.  In a year or two both would be free to leave the
secondary school at which they studied, and Jacob held that his
eldest son must then take up practical farming under experienced
tuition, while Peter was to join a veterinary surgeon for a time,
then come back to Red House and the Irish terriers.  His decisions
troubled Margery and seemed, in her mind, a slight to her sons.  For
Jacob had been himself well educated and knew the value of learning.

Thus husband and wife developed points of difference at this stage of
their united lives, though they lived placidly on the surface and
were exemplars of what marriage should be in the eyes of their
neighbours.  The invisible friction was concealed and all ran
smoothly in general opinion.

Jacob Bullstone was exacting in trifles, and Margery, while she had
waived certain pleasures that meant much to her in her early married
days, always hoped to gratify them when her children were grown out
of babyhood and life still beckoned.  Now, in sight of their crucial
years together, it was too late, and having from the first fallen in
with her husband's solitary mode of life, she found it had become
impossible to make him more gregarious and sociable.  She loved her
fellow-creatures and companionship; he preferred loneliness and found
the company of his family more than sufficient.  She was ambitious to
entertain a little and loved to see friends at Red House, or visit
them; he cared not for hospitality and could seldom be prevailed upon
either to accept it, or offer it.  He was always craving for peace,
while she found so much solitude to be melancholy, and often sighed
for distraction.  She was but thirty-four and her cheerful nature and
ready sympathy made her popular.  He was fifty and regarded the life
he liked as more dignified and worthy of respect, excusing his hermit
instinct in this manner.  She loved to talk of her own and praise her
children in the ears of other mothers.  He deprecated this desire
strongly and was morbidly sensitive about praising anything that
belonged to him.  At the same time he would grow silent if others
took his own cue, or ventured to criticise unfavourably so much as a
dog that he esteemed.

Margery concentrated on Jacob's goodness, for she knew that he was
good; and at moments of depression, when life looked more grey than
usual and its promise but bleak, after her children should be gone,
she would remember many incidents to her husband's credit.  He was
very patient; he worked hard; he helped many a lame dog over a stile;
he forgave wrongs; he was slow to think evil.  He failed as a judge
of character, which was natural in a man of his temperament; but his
disappointments bred neither irony nor bitterness.  She believed that
he thought well of human nature, so long as it did not intrude too
much upon his privacy; and she perceived that he took men at their
own valuation until they proved that he was wrong to do so.

There was one golden link, and sometimes Margery confessed to her
father, though not to her mother, that Auna, the baby of the family,
held all together and might be called the little saviour of the
situation and the central fact of the home.  She was physically her
mother again--more like Margery when eighteen, than Margery herself
now was.  She had her mother's eyes and hair, her long, slim legs,
her sudden laugh.  She was an attractive child, but very shy with
strangers.  Yet her good nature made her fight this instinct and she
pleased better in her gentle way than her more boisterous sister.
Her brothers made Avis their heroine, since she could do all they
could themselves and play boys' games; but Auna found this no sorrow.
Her father was supreme in her affections and his own regard for her
echoed her adoration.

He made no favourites openly, yet the situation could not be hidden
and none was jealous of Auna, since none ever had any ground for
grievance.  His regard for Auna surpassed that for the others, and
she loved him far better than they did.  Margery would not quarrel
with the fact, and Jacob explained it in a manner which left her no
cause for complaint.

"It's natural that, after you, she should come first with me," he
told his wife privately--indeed he often repeated the sentiment.
"She's you over again--you, to every trick and turn--you, even to the
tiny fraction your right eyebrow's higher than your left.  In body
she's you, and in mind she'll be you and me rolled into one.  And she
loves me more than the others all put together, just as you love me
more than they do.  So never wonder; and never fear I'll do less than
my whole duty to every child of mine."

She never did fear that and was only sorry for him, that life had
drawn this difference.  With such a man it was inevitable that he
would react fiercely in heart, though not out of reason.  He was
sensitive and knew himself not popular; and when he confessed as much
and she told him that the fault was his own, since he would not court
his neighbours and give them opportunity to learn his worth, he would
laugh and say she was doubtless right.  Yet, of the few friends that
he had, he was very jealous, and when a man offered friendship and
presently cooled off, as sometimes happened, by accident rather than
intent, Jacob suffered secretly and puzzled himself to invent
explanations, when often enough the other, pressed by a harder life
than his own, had merely let him slip a little from force of
circumstances, yet still imagined him a friend.

Margery regretted her mother-in-law very heartily, for she had been a
valued factor in the home and acted as anodyne of trouble on many
occasions.  She had taught her son's wife some precious truths
concerning Jacob and made her feet firm in certain particulars.  She
had won the affection of her grandchildren also and she always
possessed an art to satisfy Jacob himself.  But she was gone and with
her much that Margery had only dimly appreciated, but now missed.
The wife also tended to forget a point or two that had been wiselier
remembered.

Jacob broke out sometimes and said things that must have caused
Margery uneasiness, had she not assumed their insignificance.  What
he spoke in rare fits of anger was always of the surface and
unimportant to Margery, yet in another ear, if any had heard him,
these speeches might have sounded ominous.  Galled sometimes by
thoughtlessness in his sons, or at an answer lacking in respect, he
would roar harmlessly and even threaten.  She had heard him say that,
since Auna was the only one who cared a straw for his opinions, and
valued his fatherhood in her, she should be the only one he should
remember.  But these things were summer thunder and lightning to his
wife.  Whatever his offspring might do, short of open wrong, would
never influence Jacob.  What was hidden she regarded, indeed,
fearfully for its mystery; but that it would ever rise into
injustice, folly, madness she denied.  He was a man too forthright
and fixed in honour and justice to wrong any fellow-creature.

And this she felt despite difference in religious opinion.  She had
never probed this matter, but was aware that Jacob did not share the
convictions she had won in her home.  He seldom went to church and
seldom, indeed, discussed religion at all; but he never spoke of it
without great respect and reverence before his children, though
sometimes, to her, he allowed himself an expression that gave her
pain.

She did not doubt, however, that under his occasional contempt for
her mother's religious practices, Jacob remained a good Christian at
heart.  Indeed he had never questioned the verities of Christian
faith, or regarded himself as anything but a religious man.  But his
plain dealing and scrupulous honesty sprang from heredity and was an
integral part of his nature.  He felt no vital prompting to religious
observance in public, and his dislike of crowds kept him from
church-going save on very rare occasions.  Margery knew that he
prayed morning and evening, and had indeed reported the fact to her
mother, who distrusted Jacob in this matter.  For her son-in-law
himself Mrs. Huxam did not trouble; but she was much concerned in the
salvation of her grandchildren.


Margery wandered down the valley one afternoon when the leaves were
falling and the river making riot after a great rain in mid-moor.
She always liked these autumnal phases and loved to see the glassy
billows of the water roll, as they rolled when she came so near
drowning in her marriage year.  She proceeded to meet Jacob, who
would presently return from Brent, whither he had been to despatch
some dogs by train; and now she fell in with Adam Winter, riding home
on a pony over Shipley Bridge.  She was glad to see him, counting him
among her first friends, and he welcomed her and alighted.

"Haven't met this longful time," she said and shook hands.  This they
never did, but for once the fancy took her and he responded.

"Leaf falling again," replied Adam, "and the autumn rain upon us.  A
good year, however--middling hay and corn, good roots and good
grazing."

"I'm glad then.  Weather's nothing to us."

"It makes a difference to your feelings," he argued.  "How's things?"

"All right.  'One day followeth another,' as the Book says.  And
they're all mighty alike at Red House.  We don't change half so much
as the river.  Auna was rolling down like this when I went over the
waterfall, and you got wet on my account."

"Sixteen year next month; I haven't forgotten."

"It's a long time to remember anything; but I've not forgot neither.
How's my brother, Jeremy, treating you?"

Adam laughed.

"New brooms sweep clean; but he's made a great start, and don't he
look a pretty picture in his trap?  Up he comes, punctual as postman,
every Thursday afternoon for the butter and eggs.  Long may it last."

"And Jane's suited too--so far.  She gets off to Plymouth market on
Friday morning, and has done very clever indeed up to now."

"It was a great start in life for them, and like your husband to give
it.  A wonderful good thing to do.  Jeremy knows his luck I hope.
But there--Providence cares for the sparrows, though it over-looks
the starlings in a hard winter.  Jacob's a good un, Margery."

"So he is then--good as gold."

"And heavy as gold--so a man answered, when I said that very thing
about Bullstone not a month ago.  But I withstood him there.  He's
not heavy--only a self-centred man.  And why not?  With a home and a
wife and children and a business, all packed up in the valley so snug
and prosperous, why shouldn't he be self-centred?  Why does he want
to be anything else?"

She shook her head.

"It's narrow for a man," she answered, "and I often wish he'd go in
the world more, and welcome the world at Red House for that matter."

"I'm looking at it from his point of view--not yours," replied Adam.
"For the minute I was seeing his side.  He's not one for neighbouring
with people, and I say he don't lose much, because his business don't
call for a wide knowledge of humans.  He's in clover.  He's got a
very fine strain of dogs and the people know it and have to give a
good price for a good article.  So he's not like a farmer, who must
make the best he can of open markets and competition.  He's all
right.  But I quite grant it's not just the life you'd choose,
because you're a sociable creature.  You like fresh faces and new
voices and new opinions and new gowns; and if I'd been your husband,
you'd have had most of those things anyway."

"I believe I might.  You'd make a very good husband, Adam.  A good
husband wasted.  But why?  It's not too late.  Why don't you take a
wife?  I should be glad, for it would mean another woman here, and
new ideas."

"For your sake I would then," he said.  "But the time's past, if it
ever came.  I've got a bachelor nature and plenty to think upon
without a wife."

"Lookers on see most of the game.  I'm sure you're a lot cleverer and
more understanding than most married men."

"Not much in the way of cleverness, else I wouldn't be puzzled so
oft."

"The open mind's a very good thing.  I'd sooner be puzzled than
always think I knew.  Such a lot always think they know; and always
know wrong."

"It's the point of view," he said.

"If my Jacob could look at things from outside, same as you do; and
not always from inside, same as he does, then he'd see a lot clearer
all round life."

"He sees clear enough what he wants to see.  He don't waste his time
looking at doubtful or uncertain things.  What he does see, he sees;
and so, on his own ground, he can't be beat.  I may see a bit farther
and a bit more, but my vision's cloudy.  I'm not certain of anything."

"Yes, you are," answered Margery.  "You're as certain in religion as
I am, or my mother herself.  Now just there, in a vital thing like
that, Jacob's foggy I believe."

"The fog will lift if fog there is.  No man can do the things he does
and lack for the Guide, I reckon."

"I'll tell him what you say.  Belike it would please him."

"Better not.  He's not one to care what I might say.  I'm a slight
man in his eyes.  He might even think it was cheek my praising him."

"He likes praise really, though he'd never admit it."

"Depends where it comes from.  We don't set no store on the praise of
small people and the humble-minded.  The praise we ache for be most
times withheld.  That is if you are ambitious, like Jacob is.  A man
spoke well of in newspapers like him--what should he care for me?"

"He thinks well of you and says it's a fine thing the way you work."

"No, no--think twice, Margery.  You're inventing now--to please me.
He's got a very good knowledge of what's worth praise; and a man that
does his own duty without flinching, like your man, isn't going to
admire them who only do the same.  I do no more than that, and the
time hasn't come yet when we pat a man on the back for doing his
duty; though perhaps it will be a rare sight in the next generation."

"I wish we could look forward.  There's some things I'd dearly like
to know," said Margery.

"Lord!  What a lot we should do to fight for ourselves and them we
care about if we could do that," he answered.  "If we could look on
ten years even and see how we had changed--how habits had grown up
and fastened on us, how faith in our neighbours had gone, perhaps,
and how, with the years, we'd got more cunning, and harder and more
out for Number One--how we'd set to work to fight ourselves--eh?"

"We ought to live so that we shouldn't be afraid to look on ten
years," she assured him.  "Why not so live that your heart will be
bigger and your hope higher and your faith purer in ten years?"

"That's your mother," he answered.

"It's you," she said.  "It's you, Adam.  You don't need to fear the
years.  But I do.  I'm different, because I've got children.  It's
for them I'd love to look on, so as I might head off the dangers, if
dangers showed!"

"None have less to dread than you in that direction.  Wonderful
children--healthy, hearty, sensible.  You and Jacob have made a very
good blend for the next generation, and that's something to be
thankful for.  If marriage is a lottery--then what are childer?  Look
at my family.  Who'd have dreamed that my fine mother and my good,
sane father should have had Samuel, and Minnie, now in her grave, and
me--me--only better than Samuel by a hair, and often quite as mad as
him!  But there it was.  The poison was hid away in my mother's
family, and they never told father till after he was wedded.  A very
wicked thing and ought to be criminal--eh?  My mother went off her
head after Sam was born and had to be put away for a bit.  But she
recovered and never got queer again."

"I'd like to see you on one of your mad days," she said.  "But now
it's you telling fibs, not me.  Never was a saner man than you; and
if you weren't so sane, you'd be sad.  But if you're sad, you don't
show it.  When I'm sad, I can't hide my feelings."

"Much pleasanter not to hide 'em, if you've got somebody close at
hand to understand 'em.  That's one of the compensations of a good
marriage--to share sorrow and halve the weight of it."

She looked at him whimsically.

"Sounds all right," she said.  "Perhaps, after all, there's some
things we married ones know better than you that bide single."

"For certain.  Practice knocks the bottom out of a lot of fine
theories."

"The things that you can share with another person don't amount to
much," she told him.  "The sorrow that can be shared, and so
lessened, is only small.  If one of my children was to die, would it
make it better for me because Jacob took on?  No."

A child appeared at this moment and Auna approached from the abode of
Mr. Marydrew.  Her father's movements were not often hidden from the
little girl and she was now about to plunge down the woody lane under
Shipley Tor by which he must soon return.

"And how's old Billy, my duck?" asked Margery.

"His cough has gone," said Auna, "and he gave me this brave stick of
barley sugar."

She held the sweetmeat up to her mother.

"I haven't sucked it yet," she said.  "I won't suck it till father's
had a bit."

"He'll be along in a minute, my dinky dear, and give you a ride home."

Auna went her way.

"Billy's terrible fond of her, ever since she went in once,
unbeknownst to us, to cheer him up when poor Mercy died.  She popped
in like a mouse, and sat beside him, and told him what she'd come
for; and he liked it."

"A good old pattern of man and wise enough to care for childer about
him."

"And who cares for them better than you?  A fine father you would
have been, and I tell you again it's not too late."

"I've got Sammy--and a very good child too, when he's not crossed.
But he can be ugly."

She was thoughtful.

"Small blame to you for not marrying," she said, "I chaff you, Adam;
but very well I know why for you didn't."

They relapsed into a lighter mood, and it happened that Winter had
just uttered a sharp comment on one of Margery's speeches, which made
her pretend to be angry.  They were both laughing and she had given
him a push backwards, when Jacob came round the corner in his cart
with Auna beside him.  He had seen the gesture and Margery perceived
that he must have done so; but Adam's back was turned and he did not
know that Bullstone had appeared.

He was going now, holding his patient horse by the bridle, but
Margery stopped him.

"There's Jacob--don't bolt, else he'll think you've seen him and want
to avoid him," she said.

The man stopped, therefore, till Bullstone's trap was beside them.
Jacob smiled genially and Auna asked her mother to ascend and be
driven home.  A few words passed.  Margery told how her brother was
shining as huckster, and Adam hoped that Jeremy had now settled down
at last and was on the way to prosperity.  Jacob smiled again and
hoped so too, and then Margery climbed into the trap.

She spoke of Adam when they had left him, but her husband paid no
heed to this matter.  He was anxious to know if two letters had
reached Red House.

Then he told Auna how good the dogs had been, and she, hardened to
these partings, was glad they had gone bravely.

Jacob appeared to be as usual and the contents of his letters served
to put him in a good temper; yet Margery was sharply conscious of the
hidden watcher that night and, after some hesitation, she decided
upon returning to the subject of Adam Winter.

When they were alone she did so, though in doubt to the last moment
whether it was expedient.  The thing she designed to say might merely
serve to remind Jacob of a trifling incident he had already
forgotten; but she knew the contrary was far more likely to be the
case.  The significance of the matter would possibly be lessened by a
few words concerning it.  She was heartily sorry that the thing had
happened; and yet felt it hard and absurd that such a trifle should
cause her sorrow.  Thus she was in an uncertain mood when she did
address him--a mood not indifferent or scornful of the incident,
otherwise she had not returned to it at all; but a mood a little
regretful for herself, and in no sense tinctured with that
repentance, which alone would have made it really desirable to speak.

She waited for some time to see if Jacob himself would allude to
it--a fact that showed how little she really grasped the inner nature
of the man; for past experience might well have taught her that his
silence was assured.  He did not mention Winter at all, but spoke
placidly of his children and declared that now the holidays were done
and the boys back at school, he missed Peter in the kennels.  He then
proceeded to tell her that he was glad he had decided to keep Barton
Gill in his old, responsible position a little longer.  These things
drifted past Margery's ear, and then, just before Jacob finished his
glass of spirits and rose to lock up, she spoke.

"I'm sorry you saw me push Adam this afternoon.  It was a silly
thing; but he was poking fun at me, and you know how I'll respond to
a challenge.  Just an impulse, because I couldn't think of a sharp
answer."

"Are you sorry you did it, or only sorry I saw you do it?" he asked,
but did not wait for a reply.  "No matter--you needn't answer.  You
keep so young for your age, though you always say you're old for it."

"I'm sorry.  I grant it was foolish.  But Winter's an old friend, and
I feel as if we might almost be brother and sister sometimes.  He's
good to the children too."

"We'll go to bed," he said.

"Not till you've forgiven me."

"If you know you did a vulgar thing, that's to the good."

She flushed.

"I wish somebody had saved your life," she said, "then you'd find
that you never can feel to that person same as you feel to other
people."

"Christ's blood!" he swore, but hissed it and did not raise his voice
to be heard beyond the room.  "When are we going to hear the end of
that?"

She was alarmed, and echoes of a similar incident, now some years
old, came to her memory.  She stared at him, then banished her fear,
put her arms round his shoulders and kissed him.

"I'm so sorry, dear.  I seem to get so clumsy."

He, too, was sorry, though for something other than he now declared.
He apologised and blamed himself for being a fool; while in his heart
he felt that his folly lay, not in his anger, but the display of it.
The watcher had lifted a corner and peered from its concealment; the
banked fires had broken into a visible flame.  He had been betrayed
by the accident of her apology, and shown her something he had no
desire to show her.

Her next word accentuated his error.

"I hoped you would have mentioned it and given me a talking to.  I
deserved it."

"Seeing that I've never chidden you for anything on God's earth in my
life, it wasn't very likely I should begin to-night, was it?"

"I might be happier if you did chide me.  I dare say I do many things
you hate; if you told me so, I wouldn't do them again."

"You may be right; but it's contrary to my nature to play
schoolmaster.  Where I don't like a thing and can change it myself, I
do; but where others are concerned, if it's not my place to order, I
don't order."

"I know; but if you'd order oftener, or express an opinion as you
have to-night, we might all be quicker to do your will."

"Women like tyrants, it's said," he replied.  "But I'm not built that
way, and if wit and love can't see to please without being
ordered--so much the worse.  Forget it; forget it."

"No," she answered.  "I'll take very good care not to forget it,
Jacob."

"So you think; but true memory comes from the heart, not the head."

He was unusually silent for many days, as she knew he would be.  Then
he grew cheerful again and spoke of Shipley and the Winters in his
customary, indifferent fashion.




CHAPTER V

THE CHILDREN

On a winter's morning the Red House children were playing in a great
ruin which stood near their home.  Clay works had brought a busy
company to Shipley vale in past times; but now only the walls of the
drying houses and the stack of the furnace still stood, while above
them, on the hill, large pits, whither had flowed the liquid clay
from its bed on the high moor, were now filled with herbage,
foxgloves, blackberries and sapling trees.

This famous playground found a small company of children and dogs
assembled, and among them, as cheerful as any, was an ancient man.
Old Billy Marydrew delighted in young people, and they found him more
understanding than the middle-aged.

Children and red dogs romped over ground sparkling with frost, and
Billy sat on a stone and enjoyed the entertainment.  Auna fetched and
carried; Avis issued orders, John Henry with some condescension, took
his part.  And then he quarrelled with his brother about a terrier
that he was trying to teach a trick.

"He shall do it; I'll larn him," vowed John Henry hotly.

"He can't do it--no Irish terrier could do it," answered Peter.

They argued over the ability of the bewildered bitch, and Peter
appealed to Billy; whereupon Mr. Marydrew agreed that John Henry was
demanding impossibilities.

"When I was as young as you, John Henry," he said, "my father gave me
some silkworms for a present, and I was a determined nipper and
thought I'd train 'em up in the way they should go.  And I gave 'em
some very fine poplar leaves, which other worms be fond of.  But my
father warned me and said they must have lettuce.  'No, father,' I
told him.  'They shall eat the poplar, because I will it.  I won't
have no caterpillars setting up their wills against mine.'"

"Did you make 'em, Mr. Marydrew?" asked Auna.

"I did not, my pretty.  Instead, I found out that, though a small boy
can put a worm on a leaf, the whole round world won't make the worm
eat it--not if it isn't his food."

"And nobody won't make 'Nixie' stand on her head," vowed Peter,
"because it's contrary to her nature to do such foolishness.  They
French poodles will larn any silly thing; but not an English dog."

John argued to the contrary; Avis and Auna tried to teach the puppies
to slide on a frozen pond and John Henry, quite unconvinced, turned
to pursue 'Nixie's' studies.  But that wise dog had bolted home.

Then came along Jacob Bullstone, and hearing his children's voices,
he turned off the road and entered the ruin.  He joined the games for
a few minutes; then Avis and Peter, who were in charge of the dogs,
went homeward, and John Henry followed with Auna, while their father
proceeded to the road beside old William.

"I've been to Owley," he said.  "My brother-in-law's weakening.
Doesn't like this cold weather."

The ancient laughed.

"He'll stand to it a bit longer yet.  The pinch be going to come when
the babby does.  Then he'll have to work for the pair of 'em, and go
to market instead of his wife."

"What's the matter with the man?"

"Nothing.  A very ordinary sort of man, and if he'd been a lord, or a
landed proprietor, or any sort of chap called to spend money instead
of earn it, he'd have been a great success.  Don't we know scores of
the upper people like him?  But he wants a thick-set hedge of money
between him and real life.  Even as it is, he has had a good bit of
yours, not to say his father's.  Afore Jeremy Huxam can shine, he
must have the mercy and good-will of his neighbours.  Their good-will
he's got, and their mercy he'll surely want, if there ever comes a
time when he's got to stand alone.  But a charming chap I'm sure, and
not an enemy.  Same as your wife, without her pluck and sense, Jacob.
Your boys are more like their grandmother than her own son be."

"So I've heard, and don't want to hear it again," answered Bullstone.
"Judith Huxam's no great heroine of mine, Billy, as you know.  I see
myself in my sons, and who more likely to be in them?"

"They're a very fine pair of dear boys, and their fortunes are on
their foreheads," said Mr. Marydrew.  "Born to command is John Henry.
Peter's most like you in my judgment--got your painstaking care for
details.  He's larning all there is to know about the dogs."

"From me."

"Who else?  And why for don't you see all the way with Judith Huxam?
My late daughter thought the world of her."

"Too much hell-fire," answered Jacob.  "She's narrow and
self-righteous, and I don't want any child of mine to grow up either
one, or the other."

"A pinch of hell-fire doctrine don't hurt the young," declared Billy.
"'Tis true that you and me know the fire's cold; but a lively sense
of the dangers of wrong-doing be a good tonic for the girls and boys.
I keep in touch with the rising generation, because they believe in
me in a way I can't expect you middle-aged folks to do.  And I see
what they want--discipline.  That ain't your strong suit, nor yet
your wife's.  You go in for example; but that's not enough.  You know
what's good for a puppy, though I wouldn't say you know so well
what's good for a little human."

Jacob laughed.

"You're a wise old bird--to call you 'old.'  But how do you keep so
young in your mind, William?  Is it just character, or do you try for
it?"

"I try for it," answered Billy.  "Yes, I try for it.  You can't keep
young-minded at my age without an effort.  And this I do.  I never
look back, Jacob.  I don't drag the past after me, and I'm lucky,
maybe, because I haven't got much in my past to drag.  What is
it--what is most of the past--but a garment that makes you
discomfortable, a boot that galls?  Let the past bury the past and
always look forward."

Jacob considered and struck his gaitered leg with his walking-stick.

"The mind no doubt works healthiest when it's working forward," he
admitted.  "I know that much.  Even the best of the past makes you
turn to sadness rather than happiness.  Because the good time has
gone, I suppose, and never can come back no more."

"That's why business be such a blessing to some minds.  Business
always means looking forward--so your father used to say."

"He looked forward sure enough, and I've got to thank him for no
little that he did," replied Bullstone.  "A rare man of business, and
nobody ever cut a loss and put it behind him quicker and cleaner than
he did.  All for land, and pretty well the last thing he said in my
ear was, 'Buy in Brent.'  He knew Brent to be on the up grade in his
time, and he'd always buy when he could.  Some nice parcels I've got
for building, Billy; but most of them are not up to my selling price
yet."

They talked of Brent and then Jacob looked at his watch.

"Toddle up the valley and have dinner with us."

"Not to-day.  I've promised your missis to come Sunday," said William.




CHAPTER VI

HUNTINGDON WARREN

That winter passed without event and life at Red House offered no
incident of apparent significance whence to date--no upraised point
from which the past might be measured, or the future explored.  The
days repeated themselves until spring, returning, accelerated all
pulses and unconsciously increased vitality and will to live and
enjoy.

Bullstone's lads neared the end of their studies, and when summer
came again, John Henry, in sight of seventeen, prepared for
apprenticeship to the business of his choice.

To-day he was riding over the Moor, with his father and a farmer, to
see sheep, while Margery and the others made pilgrimage for
Huntingdon Warren.  They carried their lunch and baskets for the
whortleberrries, now growing ripe again; while more than their own
food they took, for there had come a baby at Huntingdon and Margery
conveyed certain delicacies for the wife of Benny Veale.  Old
Frederick Veale was dead; but Benny still worked the warrens; though
rumour announced that he had nearly done with them and, at his wife's
entreaty, intended soon to desert the waste and return into
civilisation.

Peter and Auna ran this way and that as they climbed slowly aloft.
They met the goats browsing together presently and played with them a
while, then hastened after the retreating figures of their mother and
sister.  And then they played a new game, at the inspiration of Auna,
and dyed their faces and hands with whortleberry juice.  They were
now Indians and, sticking a few feathers from a dead carrion crow
into their hair, and brandishing spears, represented by Peter's
fishing-rod, they rushed screaming upon Margery and Avis and demanded
food at the point of their weapons.

Presently they returned to the river beyond Zeal Plains, where Auna
and her brother washed the berry juice from their faces.  Then Peter
fished and caught some small trout with a worm.  An hour later they
tramped forward to Huntingdon Cross, ate their pasties and cake
beside it and so proceeded to the Warren House.

Red Benny saw them from afar and came to meet Margery.  He was now a
stalwart man of forty, and claimed to get more out of the rabbits
than any warrener before him; but that, he vowed, was because he
worked harder than his predecessors.  He was lean and immensely
strong, and his wife seemed cut in his own pattern.  The unexpected
arrival of visitors excited them, for few ever called at their home.
Tourists saw it afar, like a white eye under the tumulus on the hill
behind it; but it seldom happened that anything but the wild Scotch
cattle, or a moorman on a pony, came near the spot.

Sally Veale's second child was six weeks old, and Sally was by no
means an invalid.  She laughed at the nice things Margery had brought
and displayed her baby.

"Red--red," she said.  "The daps of Benny."

While Auna and Avis gazed fearfully upon the remains of a dead horse,
and Peter played with Mr. Veale's lean lurchers, despising them in
secret, Sally prattled to her visitor and declared her hatred of the
Warren.

"No place for a woman and two babies," she declared; "and my
husband's of my mind.  He's pretty well fed up.  I want to go to the
in-country and for Benny to be a gamekeeper; and Mr. Blake, to
Beggar's Bush, would take him on next fall, when his head man stops;
but Benny's all for foreign parts and more trapping.  He says that in
the far north of Canada, a man like him could face the winters and
catch creatures whose fur be worth their weight in gold.  But if he
does that, it will be out of the frying-pan into the fire for me I
reckon."

"Work on him to go to Beggar's Bush," advised Margery.  "Then you'll
come down to Brent and have your neighbours about you.  It's cruel
and unnatural for us women to be shut off from the world."

"That's what I say.  But he's all for the wilds again."

Margery talked of the past.  Huntingdon had been a spot on her great
holiday pilgrimage with Jacob, before they were wed, and every
feature of that long day's ramble her mind held precious still.  The
old radiance of the image was long departed, yet force of a habit,
that had extended through years, still woke an afterglow of interest
in certain scenes when she came among them.

She talked of Benny's father, whom Sally had not known.

Tea was prepared and, while they were eating it, Bullstone and his
son arrived on horseback.  They joined the meal and presently, when
the young people were off again, Benny repeated his determination to
depart.

Jacob heard the alternative courses and advised him to stop in
England, for the sake of his family.  Then he said a thing that
surprised Margery.

"So like as not I'll lease the warrens when you go--if ever you
really do go.  I'm very much set on Huntingdon.  It's the sort of
lonely spot that does me good.  If I were to take it, I'd employ a
couple of men to live here and keep a room for myself--for sake of
health and peace."

"Easier to say you'll employ men than to do it," answered Benny,
"Took me a month of Sundays to find a boy.  The warrens are very near
played out in my opinion.  There's not the head of rabbits used to
run in my father's time.  Nobody will ever lease 'em again if you
don't."

Jacob discoursed of Benny's two boys and asked their names.  Then
Margery was shocked.

"Haven't got names yet," confessed Benny.  "We can't come to no
agreement.  Missis wants a grand sort of name, like 'Fortescue' or
'Champernowne,' and I say 'Fred' after father, or 'Thomas' or
'Richard.'  No good giving children silly names."

"I lived along with the Champernownes as under housemaid," explained
Sally; "and 'tis a valiant name."

"It doesn't go with Veale, however," confessed Jacob.

"But if they're not named, they're not baptized!" exclaimed Margery.

"They are not," admitted their father, "and none the worse so far as
I know."

"They're not Christians then--oh, Benny!"

"No more ain't I," answered the warrener.  "It's no good pretending
nothing.  No man can breathe a word against me, but I've not got
religion and never felt the want of it.  More haven't Sally."

His wife contradicted him, declaring that she had always gone to
church in her maiden days; and Margery was too troubled to speak.

"Duty's duty and I do it; and if ever I've got time, I'll go into
religion also," explained Benny; "but so far time's lacked."

"You must have them baptized whatever you believe, or don't believe,"
declared Jacob.  "You can't let your sons be nameless and outside the
pale.  That's wrong, Veale, and I hope you'll mend it."

"Don't think I've got anything against religion," replied the other.
"It shall be done, if you reckon it ought, Mr. Bullstone.  And I'll
name one, and my wife shall have her way with the other."

"Haven't you heard about original sin?" asked Margery.

"No, never," replied Benny.  "But there's no pride in me and my wife.
We'll hunt up some gossips and put the thing in train."

"I'll be one, and I'll buy a christening cake, and you shall come
into Red House on the way home and eat it," said Margery.  Even the
prospect of this modest entertainment pleased her.

The parents were much gratified, and still more so when Jacob also
agreed to be a godfather.

"Duty's all right, Benny; but we must have law and order also," he
explained.  "This is a Christian land, and though Christians differ a
lot and some take their religion sadly, and some cheerfully, and some
so lightly that it doesn't amount to anything at all, yet we must bow
to custom and it won't do you much good with any master to say you're
no Christian; because the Christian habit is to distrust any who
don't subscribe."

It was arranged that when Mrs. Bullstone returned from her holiday to
Plymouth, the children should be received into the Church.

Sally declared great gratification and Benny promised Jacob not to
declare himself a pagan--if merely as a measure of worldly wisdom.

"And I hope you'll go one better presently," added Bullstone, "and
find you can honestly call yourself a member."

"I always keep an open mind," answered the warrener.  "I don't
quarrel with nobody's opinions if their practice stands for 'em."

"It's all summed up in that," admitted Jacob.  "But, because we fall
short in practice, you godless men mustn't quarrel with our
principles.  The principles are loftier than our powers to reach--to
make us aim high, Benny.  I don't hold with a lot I hear and see; but
then I allow for the poverty of human nature, finding it in myself.
And when you know how poor you are yourself, you make allowance for
others."

Benny listened and so did the women.

"All true as Gospel I'm sure," murmured Sally.

"Yes," said Margery, who had been astonished at Jacob, "and you two
had best set about finding how true the Gospel is."

Somewhat cast down, the warrener and his wife presently witnessed the
departure of the Bullstone family.

Jacob decided to walk back and, to his satisfaction, Peter was
allowed to mount his father's horse and proceed with his brother.
The boys were soon out of sight and Margery, well pleased, walked
beside her husband.

The evening was full of gracious light and the west threw a roseal
warmth of colour into the bosom of the Moor.  The hour was reflected
in Margery's mood and she found herself happy, weary, content.
Jacob, too, discoursed amiably and praised his eldest son.  Sometimes
they came thus closer in spirit and wondered secretly why it was not
always so.  Yet, even as the sun sank and they entered the deep
gorges of the river, where it wended toward their home, something of
the twilight entered Margery's mind also, by reason of a thing said.

They had dwelt on the past to their mutual satisfaction and he, she
found, remembered their lovers' walk of old, which had brought them
home again by the same path that now they trod.  Their minds were at
peace and no dark thought, for the moment, thrust in upon Jacob; no
doubt or dread of the watcher saddened his wife.  Then she asked a
question and, though it was inspired by concern for him alone, there
arose out of his answer a spirit of helplessness in her that was
swift to awaken the familiar gloom in him.  Thus the tramp that had
begun with both in good heart, drifted them finally upon silence
before they were home again.

"What did you mean about Huntingdon being good for health and peace,
Jacob?" she asked.  "I didn't like to say anything before those
people.  But you don't mean you feel your health frets you?  You're
all right?"

"Right enough.  We breathe the same air in the valley as they do on
the hill.  I didn't mean health of body.  I'm so hearty that I don't
know my luck in that respect, or guess what it would mean to be
otherwise.  Health of mind is what I meant.  A man's mind often gets
sick."

"Not yours I'm sure."

"Don't say that, because you're not sure.  Who should know that my
mind often falls sick better than you do?  And I've found one healing
thing, and that's solitude."

"Surely to God you're solitary enough?"

"You don't know the meaning of solitude," he answered, "because
you've never tried it."

"'Never tried it!'  What's my life?"

"You imagine your life's lonely and even such loneliness as ours--so
to call it--casts you down and makes you miserable.  Solitude is no
physic for you, and I dare say, if we lived in a town, you'd be a
happier woman."

"I'm not lonely really--I know that.  Life's a bustling thing--even
mine."

"Company is your food and my poison," he answered.  "That's how it
is.  Loneliness--what I call loneliness--is as much beyond my power
to get, as company--what you call company--is beyond your power.
We've made our bed together and must lie upon it."

"You ought to have thought of that sooner, if you wanted to be a
hermit, for ever out of sight of your fellow-creatures."

"We've made our bed," he answered, "and what we've got to do is to
keep our eyes on the bright side.  Nobody's life pans out perfect.
My idea of a good time would be a month at Huntingdon all alone."

"That wasn't your idea of a good time when you married me; and if you
say that, it only means I've changed you and made you hunger for what
you never wanted before you married."

"You needn't argue it so, Margery.  I might as well say that you were
happy with me at Red House long ago, and didn't want anybody else but
me.  Life changes our tastes and appetites; life laughs at us, while
it makes us cry sometimes.  I want Huntingdon for contrast, because
home often comes between me and my best thoughts--because home often
fouls my thoughts, if you must know.  And you--home makes you hunger
for change--change--new ideas--new voices--new faces.  Why not?  I
don't blame you.  We are both smitten and must bend to the rod."
