The Project Gutenberg eBook of Children of men
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Children of men


Author: Eden Phillpotts

Release date: October 23, 2023 [eBook #71941]

Language: English

Original publication: London: William Heinemann Ltd, 1923

Credits: Al Haines


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHILDREN OF MEN ***






CHILDREN OF MEN


BY

EDEN PHILLPOTTS

AUTHOR OF "EUDOCIA," "BRUNEL'S TOWER," ETC.



LONDON

WILLIAM HEINEMANN LTD.




_First Published_, 1923


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY WOODS & SONS, LTD., LONDON W.1.




FOREWORD

The egotism of a personal note may, for once, be permitted to me,
since an enterprise, launched some thirty years ago in 'Children of
the Mist,' now reaches its port of destination with the present
story.  When 'Widecombe Fair' was written, that book appeared the end
of the matter; but fresh challenges from life on the Dartmoors, and
renewed strength to meet them, enabled me to add certain passages to
the total and render the design orbicular and complete.  With
'Children of Men' it is accomplished and the purpose may be related
in brief words.

Without learning, or bias, or convictions to determine my trend, I
have said 'Yes' to life as it unfolded in this small theatre.  Mine
was neither a great nor a subtle vision, but unvitiated within its
limitations.

Given faith that conscious Will is at the helm of human affairs, then
a definite attitude must result before the spectacle of humanity; but
if the mind be built to accept only unconscious Law as controller,
the outlook differs and a resolute trust may develop in man, as
ultimate arbiter of his own destiny.  Neither assumption can be
proved, or disproved; but the relation of a controlling, guiding
Spirit to the Universe lies open to doubt; its subjection to Law does
not; and building upon this latter certainty, I discovered, in the
evolution of the moral principle, full cause for trust and for hope.

Observation has convinced me that moral evolution is upward, despite
massive, contemporary evidence to the contrary.  For the War and the
peace alike I recognise as a transient paralysis of human reason, not
its negation.  The War was an attack of familiar maladies for which
man's own errors of ignorance were to be condemned, not the laws of
his being; but it was an unutterable infamy and disgrace to him, for
this reason, that it proves him to be lagging behind the time-table
of moral evolution.  Ere now he should have outgrown his present
stature, and the causes of his tardy progress, his centuries of
loitering in the desert, are as plain as pitiful.  An impartial
ethics can point to where his faith took the wrong turn; but progress
in righteousness is only delayed; I have seen dawn upon the mountain
tops too often not to trust that it will presently descend into the
shadowed homes and sleeping hearts of men.

Fortified by this opinion--the only opinion I ever clung to--my
instinct turned from the way of least resistance on easy and level
lands and strove to climb, to sacrifice without regret the highest,
best, most hopeful, as life itself actually does.  Thus only is the
vitality of the creator proved in his creation and tragedy achieved,
which, according to the measure of an artist's endowment, is clean,
cathartic, inspiring and obedient to the laws and realities of things
as they are.  Irrationalism chokes under this atmosphere: only the
humanist can breathe it.

But the world grows braver, for we have seen great artists open its
eyes and blow the breath of honesty and truth into its lungs; we have
seen the sentimental vapours of the past dispelled in the freedom
that art now attains; we have seen the artist pitiless, that his
audience may learn the meaning of pity; ugly, that others may find
wherein true beauty lies.

By the kindness of Messrs. Heinemann and The Macmillan Company full
titles of my Dartmoor cycle are recorded on another page; and it is a
source of deepest gratification to know that in the future, when
conditions of production admit it, they design for me a definitive
edition.  His publishers can pay no author a greater compliment than
that, and I take this opportunity to thank them for the highest
distinction my work has ever brought.

As a man's footsteps in the dew of the morning are the labours of the
minor artist; but if he challenge surer feet and greater strength to
pursue his quest before the dews are dried and his passing forgotten,
then he also has played a part.  The masters flash lightning through
our clouds of human passion, ignorance and error, or hang rainbows of
promise upon their gloom; but for us of the rank and file, it is
enough that we make happy such as have only heard of happiness and
waken the dayspring of courage in fearful hearts; it is enough if we
kindle one valley mist with a gleam of beauty, or pour some few, pure
drops of hope into the thirsty and percipient soul.

E. P.




CONTENTS


PROLOGUE

CHAPTER

  I. Betrothal
  II. On Ugborough Beacon
  III. The Rescue


BOOK I

  I. Jeremy
  II. At Red House
  III. Barton Gill Under Notice
  IV. On Shipley Bridge
  V. The Children
  VI. Huntingdon Warren
  VII. Sunday
  VIII. The Revel
  IX. The Gift
  X. After the Holiday
  XI. The Offer of Owley
  XII. On the Hill
  XIII. The Oranges
  XIV. End of a Home


BOOK II.

  I. Chorus
  II. Verdict
  III. Utility
  IV. Auna Tries
  V. Revenge
  VI. The Witch Doctor
  VII. At Jacob's Bedside
  VIII. Jeremy Evasive
  IX. Jacob Comes Home
  X. Flight
  XI. After the Wedding
  XII. A Problem for Auna
  XIII. At the Barbican


BOOK III.

  I. 'Mother's Stone'
  II. Driving in the Ponies
  III. The Pilgrim Fathers
  IV. Evening Star
  V. The Autumn Wind
  VI. The Children
  VII. William's Birthday
  VIII. Jeremy
  IX. Exodus
  X. Fever
  XI. Jacob Lives
  XII. The Christening
  XIII. The Promise




CHILDREN OF MEN



CHAPTER I

BETROTHAL

On a day in high summer the valley was full of light, and Auna River,
her moorland journey ended, bowed under a plantation of pine and fir,
then sparkled forth, to learn what welcome awaited her in the lower
lands.  Above the stream, easterly, a green hill towered against the
sky; stunted thorns broke the sweep of the eagle fern, grey rock
clitters spread and cloud shadows drifted over all, to cool the
brightness.

A wood massed beneath in the mouth of the vale, and from this dusky
retreat there leapt the river, in a succession of planes broken at
each little fall by an apron of granite.  Here the ripples flashed
with foam; here the blue of the sky was caught in the gliding surface
between, where Auna's tresses twined soberly, and fern, heather,
woodrush cast their reflections into her tremorous mirror.

Two stone shelves presently barred the waterway and, leaping one, the
river made a circular sweep above the second and eddied in a little
backwater.  The later ledge was gentle and its steps sloped to three
feet above the stream.  It was fringed with herbage and flowers, and
here Auna loitered, making shadows for fingerling trout to play in.
Through the limpid crystal there shone agate and amber tones of rock
and pebble beneath; and these warm colours were repeated in the
tunic, breeches and gaiters of a girl who sat above the pool.

Round her thronged a dozen lesser lives, that wove a restless, ruddy
pattern about her feet, in her lap and upon her shoulders.  Girl and
puppies completed the harmony and made a splash of rich, auburn light
beside the river.  The Irish terriers kept on the move about their
kennel-maid and seemed to flow over her, as the stream flowed over
the stones.  They nuzzled her cheeks, licked her fingers, thrust
their noses into the black hair coiled up under her cap.  She was a
slim, brown girl with grey eyes, that seemed large for her small
features, and a pretty, yielding mouth.  She was tall and of maidenly
slimness; her little breasts moved under the light garments that she
wore; she laughed and played with the puppies; but a deeper joy than
they could give lighted her face.


"Leave me alone, my chicks!" she said, and pushed them away from her
with both hands.  They scattered, tugging and tumbling; then, while
the girl tidied her hair and stilled her laughter, the puppies set up
their infant barking; and she knew that somebody must be upon the
by-road that ran parallel with the stream.

She rose, jumped over the narrow neck of the pool and joined the man
who was coming up the valley.  The puppies already swarmed round his
heels.

"Could you get it?" she asked, and the man held up a large tin.

"Just in time," he answered.  "They were starting off with the cream
to Brent, but Mr. Winter spared me a pound."

"Are they settling in pretty clever?"

"Yes; they're getting straight."

Jacob Bullstone stood half a foot taller than the girl and was
fifteen years older.  Now a great thing had happened to him, and, at
thirty-five, one whom his neighbours declared would remain a bachelor
was in love with his kennel-maid and engaged to be married.  He owned
varied possessions and, thanks to an industrious and prosperous
father, inherited some fortune.  Two farms were his property in the
lap of Ugborough Beacon, at the foothills of the moor a few miles
from his home; while here, beside the river behind the pine wood, he
dwelt with his widowed mother and pursued the business dearest to his
own heart.

Bullstone bred a famous strain of red Irish terriers and sustained
the reputation that his father had won before him.  He was a man of
good education, great energy and high principle, and he lived a
narrow life.  He had never roamed, but found his intelligence and
spirit of enquiry satisfied in his native environment of moor and
vale, comfortable state and interesting occupation.  He did not guess
that his outlook was limited, for he had been educated at a grammar
school and thought himself to possess clearer wits than most of his
neighbours.  The fact, together with his prosperity, made him
satisfied with his own accomplishments and wits.  His old mother did
nothing to modify his self-judgment; but none ever found the man
unfriendly or puffed up, for he was of a kindly, generous
disposition, did good things and held it no fault in another to
differ from his opinions.

Love, however, opened Jacob's mind to a lack in himself that he had
not suspected.  He still felt timid and distrustful before the depths
of ignorance revealed by his new emotions.

In person Jacob Bullstone was large and heavily modelled, with broad
shoulders and a clean-cut, swarthy face.  His eyes were dark brown
and of a sulky cast in repose, but the expression belied him.  He had
a low, wide forehead, a square jaw and heavy chin.  He shaved clean
and his mouth was large and well shaped.  He kept his black hair so
short that the lines of his skull were clearly seen.  It sloped
rather steeply backward from the brow and bulged a little above his
small ears.

He was hatless and clad in tawny tweeds with black leggings and a
dirty, red waistcoat.  He walked with a long stride, that he was now
taming to go with Margery Huxam's footsteps, and for adornment he
wore his father's gold signet-ring on the little finger of his left
hand and the silver mask of a fox in his green tie.

The lovers proceeded together deep in their own concerns, for they
had been betrothed a week; the startling news was known at Margery's
home in Brent, four miles away down the valley, and to-day her
parents and her brother were coming to the kennels, that they might
dine with Mr. Bullstone and his mother.

The cream from Shipley Farm was for them.

Margery Huxam had turned kennel-maid for love of the life and not
because any reason existed that she should earn her own living.
Barlow Huxam, her father, kept the post-office at Brent as an
addition to his own prosperous drapery establishment.  He had but two
children living, and Margery, who adored dogs and understood them,
came to Red House, Jacob Bullstone's home, that she might fill the
vacancy until he should be suited with a new assistant.

The families were long acquainted and Mr. Huxam, little dreaming that
such a great matter would spring from the incident, raised no
objection to his daughter's wish.

She came for a fortnight in friendship, but liked the work so well
that she presently proposed to stop on at a salary; and since she had
proved herself skilled and had won the affection of old Mrs.
Bullstone and Jacob's head kennel-man, he was glad to secure her.

Her parents, however, protested and, after six months, began to
agitate for the return of their only daughter; but when Judith Huxam
demanded that Margery should come home again, the dog-breeder had
discovered that his future happiness depended upon her.

Their courting, at first almost unconscious, proceeded quickly
towards the finish, for man and woman were of a mind, and though a
gap of fifteen years separated them and made Bullstone fearful when
he found the truth, circumstances combined to diminish this
disparity, for the girl had been bred in a puritanical home under a
strenuous mother, who regarded happiness at best as doubtful.
Margery's experience of young men was exceedingly limited and, to
her, Jacob's sobriety, steadfast outlook and fixed opinions were more
attractive than the happy-go-lucky attitude of her own generation.
She loved him very heartily before he had given a gleam that he also
was in love; but her emotion had been of a gentle pattern and thrust
away with secret blushes as something near akin to wickedness.  She
felt a gulf was fixed between such an important, well-to-do man and
her young self.  Indeed she did not even suffer, but rather laughed
at herself for her moonshiney dreams.  Then came the evidence from
the other side and she was overwhelmed to find her power over one
regarded as unyielding before women.  He approached her with
humility, declared genuine pride and satisfaction on the discovery of
her love, rejoiced to learn that he seemed not too old to her and
instantly acquainted her parents with the fact that she had consented
to wed him.

Barlow Huxam declared gratification, but his wife was not so well
pleased.

The match, while in every respect a brilliant one and beyond what
they might have hoped for Margery, found her mother in some doubt.
She suspected that fifteen years was too great a difference of age;
and she professed uncertainty concerning the past life of a bachelor
of thirty-five.  She did not know anything against Bullstone, or his
parents before him; she could not name the quality of her suspicions,
yet she questioned Margery very closely and warned her of the step
that she designed.  But no permanent cloud appeared and Jacob
conducted himself in a manner to disarm Mrs. Huxam; for his views of
matrimony satisfied her and he proposed a settlement that could only
be regarded as generous.  In this matter, however, Barlow Huxam was
not behind his future son-in-law.

Twice on Sundays the lover brought Margery to her family, and twice
he worshipped with them at their tabernacle.  His behaviour was
agreeable to Mrs. Huxam and her doubts finally dwindled.

To-day, while Margery and Jacob walked side by side towards Red
House, nestling under a shoulder of the hill behind the pine woods,
the girl's parents and her brother were already upon their way,
tramping through shady lanes upward through the valley to Shipley
Bridge.

"I'd best change into a petticoat before they come," said Margery.
"Mother little likes my breeches, and thanks God I shan't wear 'em
much longer."

"I feel the same," said the man.  "You know I'm at you to doff them
once for all."

"I love 'em," she declared.  "I'll miss them cruel.  You courted me
while I was in 'em, and I shall put them on now and again--for luck.
Petticoats slow your going and be tame after breeches."

"'T was never heard that man and wife both wore 'em," he said.

They passed through the woods with the puppies galloping round about,
and then they came to the stone-built home of the Bullstones--a
granite house under red tiles, which covered the upper storey of the
walls also.  It basked under the hot sun in a hollow notch of Black
Tor, while the river ran at its feet and a grass lawn spread before
the windows.  Above, on the hillside, were scooped terraces where
grew cabbage and turnip, and beyond sprang the trees to the hill
crest westerly.  Laurel and rhododendron made the slope snug; the
kennels extended behind the house, while Bullstone's property spread
to the other side of the river also and there an acre or two had been
cleared, where potatoes grew in the rich alluvial.  Fowls and ducks
flourished at stream side and the link between Red House and the
outlying cultivation was a bridge of pine logs thrown across Auna,
where her banks rose high.

Everything about the place was neat, trim and stern.  The hedges were
clipt, the ground clean; for Jacob Bullstone's mother was an
old-fashioned woman and had lived with a husband inspired by the same
ideas.

"The highest beauty be tidiness," Mrs. Bullstone never wearied of
declaring, and her son was content to echo that opinion.  His home
and its surroundings proclaimed the distinction of use, but none
other.  There were no flower beds, no attempt to decorate house,
garden, or river.  Indeed Auna was chastened by stone-built banks,
until she passed southerly away to the rocks and rapids and the deep
mossy pools, where Red House ducks and geese spent their pleasantest
hours.  Nature strove with man, but man conquered for a little space.

Mrs. Bullstone was at the door and repeated her son's directions, as
she took the cream from him.

"Get up to your chamber and doff them clothes, Margery.  I well know
your mother don't hold with 'em and I hope you won't wear 'em no
more."

"I'm kennel-maid a little longer, mother," replied the girl.  Then
she entered and Jacob conducted the puppies to their quarters.
Behind the house was a large exercise yard, with open compartments
wired off round about it, a boiler house for the preparation of food,
and various buildings on two sides of the square.  The red mothers of
the puppies welcomed them back and the little things knew their
parents.  Separated dogs barked to Jacob from enclosures and pressed
their noses through the bars; but all were of the same breed and to
an untrained eye exactly resembled each other.  Jacob accosted a few,
then turned to a man who was mixing food.

"The goats are gone up Shipley Tor," he said.  For goats were a
feature of the establishment.  A little flock was kept, since goats'
milk in Bullstone's opinion was the primest food for new born dogs.

Barton Gill, though bald and wrinkled, was not so old as he looked.
As a lad he had worked for Jacob's father and was now little more
than fifty, though he appeared to be nearer seventy.  He was slow of
voice and gesture, but still was strong and hearty behind his
wrinkles and somewhat pessimistic view of life.

"They goats be the bane of my days," he said, "and a time's coming
when I shan't be able to keep pace with the toads."

Jacob laughed shortly.

"Must be grizzling--and you only in your full manhood, as we all
know."


A mile away walked slowly Barlow Huxam and his wife, while Jeremy,
their son, a lad of fifteen, loitered behind them, to play and fling
stones; but he kept his parents in sight.  Mr. Huxam, a solid fair
man of five and forty, mopped his brow and declared that he must rest
and grow cooler before proceeding.

"We ought to have hired Mr. Catt's little chaise as I ordained to
do," he said.  "'Tis drouthy weather and a thunder-storm promising
for certain."

His wife, however, did not agree with him.

"You don't take enough foot exercise, Barlow.  If you was to walk
more, it wouldn't pour out of you same as it does.  There's no
thunder in the air, else my head would know it.  We'll rest by the
bridge since we're a thought before time."

Judith Huxam--a daughter of the prosperous race of the
Pulleyblanks---was the same age as her husband.  A dark-haired, neat
woman was she, who put folk in mind of a bantam hen.  Always trim,
alert and self-possessed, character marked her face, voice and
opinions.  She was pious, with the piety of a generation now
vanishing away, and also very proud; but she had the instinct to hide
much of herself from the world, being seldom in her neighbour's
houses and restrained in the matter of criticism.  She was stern and
never forgot a wrong; but she accepted everything that happened,
because she held it her duty to do so.  She ruled her husband and her
children as a matter of course, and Mr. Huxam pretended greater
enthusiasm for her bleak religion and opinions than he felt; but he
entertained the keenest admiration for her and, if he ever differed
from her conclusions, it was only in his mind.  He never crossed
Judith, but supported her rule in the home, as he had long since
fallen in with her conduct of the shop.  Her face was strong and her
natural expression attractive, for she had a frank gaze and regular
features.  But her grey eyes were hard, and while a pleasant,
receptive expression marked her features, her lips were set closely
together.  She never laughed and rarely smiled, save conventionally
upon customers.  She dressed in puritanical fashion and eschewed
finery.  Her dark brown hair was parted in the middle and curled up
closely behind in a plain roll.  She wore a small bonnet and always
dressed in grey.  Her voice was rather low pitched and of agreeable
quality, but she spoke little save to the purpose.  Indeed she
distrusted volubility.

The drapery establishment reflected Judith, and young people rarely
patronised it save for necessities.  The maidens of Brent held that
if you wanted clothes that wouldn't show, Huxam's might be sought;
but for adornments, fripperies and "fal-lals," one must seek
elsewhere.

At Shipley Bridge the road crossed the river half a mile below Red
House; and here Mr. Huxam stopped, where, shaded by oak trees, there
spread inviting herbage.

"We'll sit here on the spine grass for ten minutes while I cool
down," he said.

He subsided, opened his waistcoat and dabbed his face, hands and neck
with a white handkerchief, while Mrs. Huxam called her son, tidied
him, made him dust his boots with a frond of fern and walk beside her
for the rest of the way.

She looked at a gold watch on a thin gold chain, then paced to a gate
a few yards distant and regarded the roof of a farm that rose under
the flank of Shipley Tor.

"I wonder how Miss Winter and Adam and Samuel are settling in," she
said.  "A bit lonesome after Five Elms, and a poor place, so the last
man always declared."

"The last man would have made a poor place of any place," answered
her husband.  "He was always clever at picking the eyes out of a farm
and then leaving it for a better than himself to build up again.  And
so it will be here; but Winter's got it at a very low rent, and he's
a worker and may do well.  His zany brother's a mighty worker also.
The Lord denied wits, but gave him a strong body."

Mrs. Huxam continued to regard the roof of Shipley Farm without
speaking.

"He's a man who'll come to Sunday meeting no matter how long the
way," declared Barlow Huxam hopefully.

"And his sister too.  One of the Chosen her, if ever a woman was
chose," answered his wife.

Then Jeremy raised a shout and ran over the bridge.

"Here's Margery!" he cried.

The kennel-maid had put on a blue skirt, a straw hat with a white
ribbon and a plain white blouse.  Mr. Huxam rose, while his daughter,
having kissed her brother, now greeted her parents.

"You're hot, you dear," she said to Mr. Huxam; but he declared that
he was now cool again.

They set out, Margery walking between her mother and father, Jeremy
playing with an adult terrier who had accompanied her.

"I hope," said Mrs. Huxam, "that they've made no great meal on our
account."

"They have then.  We've got a sucking-pig!"

"A waste, and it ain't the weather for it anyway," declared Judith.

"It's always the weather for sucking-pig," said Mr. Huxam, "though
seldom enough nowadays do any man let himself go in that direction.
A dish for kings, and of such a tender substance that I've never
known the day was too hot to enjoy it.  But it asks for mastery in
the kitchen.  If I'd known, I'd have let Mrs. Bullstone have a recipe
from my old mother's cookery book.  Full of vanished wisdom that
book."

"Fuller of vanished greediness," asserted his wife.  "People thought
more of their stomachs in them days; at least you Huxam people did.
The Pulleyblanks----"

She stopped and called to Jeremy.

"Don't run no more--quiet down and walk along with me, boy."

Her eyes softened when they rested on her son.

A cool and refreshing shadow embraced them as they entered the pine
wood; then their destination glinted red through the tree stems and
Jacob Bullstone appeared to welcome them.

"Punctual to the stroke," he said.

"Them as keep a post-office don't fail there," declared Mr. Huxam.
"And how's yourself, Jacob?  Still of a mind?"

"So much of a mind that I don't want you people to be gone till
Margery's named the day," answered the lover.

"Plenty of time for that," replied Margery's mother.  "There's a lot
to be thought upon."

Her eyes were everywhere.  She had a trick to bend her head a little
when she was observing, and now, herself unmarked, Judith took in a
thousand incidents, regarded with approval the spotless purity of the
place, its thrifty details of contrivance and the somewhat brusque
and stark lines of the outlying ground and little grass-covered
garden patch.

She had never been here before, but Red House was familiar to her
husband.

Mrs. Bullstone appeared at the door and in five minutes the party sat
at dinner.  The parlour was a plain room with a solid table, solid
chairs and a solid and enormous sideboard bright with cups and
trophies won by Bullstone terriers.  A few dog portraits hung upon
the walls, and the empty grate was heaped with red pine cones.  Jacob
sat at the head of the table and his mother at the foot, while
Margery and her father were on Bullstone's left, Mrs. Huxam and
Jeremy upon the right.

The master devoted himself to his future mother-in-law.

"Margery favours you, ma'am," he said, "and Master Jeremy's like his
father."

Judith considered the suggestion.

"I wouldn't say that altogether," she answered.  "My children's more
Huxam than Pulleyblank; but Thomas, my eldest boy--who died so brave
doing his duty two years ago--he was very like me."

"The daps of his mother was our dear Thomas," added Barlow.  Then he
sighed.

"Thomas was all Pulleyblank, same as I am," continued Mrs. Huxam.  "A
good young man."

"A sad loss for you," said Mrs. Bullstone.

"No; don't think that.  I'm not one of those who say, 'What Thou
doest we know not now.'  That's too grudging to the Lord.  I know
where Thomas went, and faith is but an idle word if it can't help you
to face the Divine Will.  When God sends for a young man, his mother
ought to be gay and proud to let him go."

"No doubt, no doubt," murmured Mrs. Bullstone.

"Faith is a fine thing carried to such a pitch," admitted Jacob.

"Yes," assented Barlow Huxam, "but, all the same, when you think on
the details of that fatal catastrophe, you feel bound to say, 'What
Thou doest we know not now.'  For look at it.  What happened?  Our
Thomas sees a runaway hoss with a trap behind it, and a man and woman
in the trap.  And like the chap he was, without a thought of self, he
goes for the creature's head.  But he was carried off his legs in an
instant moment, and though he stopped the hoss and saved the man and
woman alive by so doing, the shaft struck him under the ribs and he
lived but three hours afore he went to his reward.  And who did he
save?  He saved Squire Blake's son and a scarlet woman he was driving
to Plymouth; and Marsden Philip Blake was drunk as a lord at the
time, else the badly used hoss wouldn't have run away."

"All true," said Judith quietly, "and to the common eye it will
always be matter for wonder that Providence worked like that.  But no
wonder to me.  Marsden Blake's not forgot.  He was saved for a deep
reason, and before we die, we shall know it."

"He was up here with the otter hounds last week," said Jacob
Bullstone.

"Wait and watch," answered Mrs. Huxam.  "Time will show why my Thomas
was called to save that man.  It won't be hid from this generation."

Barlow guided the conversation into cheerfuller channels and praised
the sucking-pig; but he declined the decanter of brown sherry.

"All water drinkers," he said.

"Same here," answered Jacob.  "I only bought it on your account."

Mr. Huxam regarded the wine without condemnation.

"Very good to go with such a rare dish," he admitted, "but my family
were never much addicted to it, and Pulleyblanks were famous
teetotallers always--though great on tea."

"I don't remember that we were great on tea," said Judith.  "Who was
great on tea, Barlow?"

Mr. Huxam never argued with his wife.

"I'm mistook then," he answered.  "I had a fancy your grandmother
doted on it, but no doubt I'm wrong."

"She liked the old herby tea made of marjoram," answered Mrs. Huxam.

"And a very pretty drink too," chimed in Jacob's mother.  "I'm old
enough to remember it, and I've often had a mind to store marjoram;
but I dare say now it would seem very weak after proper China tea."

"My mother loves tea; and I'm all for cider," said Bullstone, "but
Margery won't touch even that."

"And never will," promised Mrs. Huxam.  "Cider's too often the thin
end of the wedge.  I've known it happen so.  No young man stops at
cider."

Judith was quite silent for a considerable time after this remark,
and their talk ranged over various subjects.

Jacob felt not sanguine for his new neighbour.

"Adam Winter's making a mistake," he said, "and hardly a man that can
afford to make another by all accounts.  A very honest chap they tell
me, but too trustful.  No good ever come out of Shipley Farm--else I
dare say I'd have bought it before now; but my father always warned
me against it.  I shall lend Winter a hand if it lies in my power,
however."

After dinner Mrs. Bullstone led the way to her little drawing-room
and she and Margery's mother spent half an hour together.  It was an
apartment seldom used and impregnated with that faint smell common to
chambers not much occupied.  The furniture was ugly and solid--a
suite upholstered in Cambridge blue.  Adornments of coloured glass
occupied the mantelshelf, a case of gaudy stuffed birds stood on a
bracket, and another of waxen fruits filled the midst of a round and
highly polished walnut table in the centre of the room.  A few books
were disposed round the central decoration, and upon a little
"what-not" reposed tropical shells.  Elsewhere, as the chief feature
of a sideboard with a looking-glass back, a large and heavy book with
gilt edges reposed upon a red wool mat, while a smaller book lay upon
the big one.

Mrs. Huxam observed these two books and her eyes narrowed; but she
said nothing.

They chatted concerning their betrothed children, and each implicitly
indicated that the other mother might consider herself fortunate.
Then, apparently conscious that this attitude was exhausted, Jacob's
parent began to praise Margery and declared her to be a good and
attractive girl, well suited by her nature to her future husband and
by her nurture to the varied duties and obligations of married life.

Judith listened, but it was characteristic of her that when others
echoed her opinion, she generally began to modify it, and now, even
in the matter of her daughter, she put a period to the elder's
praises.

"We mustn't be blind, however," she said.  "I think with you that
there's great virtues in Margery, and I've watched her grow up and
done my best to build her character; but she's not perfect: there's a
full share of Huxam.  The Huxam qualities are there--good as well as
bad.  And the good you've noted very clever, and I hope the bad won't
have any chance to display themselves.  Yet that's a vain hope, too,
because the Tempter always takes very good care that life shall
strike at the roots of our weakness sooner or later, and touch the
danger spots."

"And what might they be, Mrs. Huxam?"

"A tendency to take the line of least resistance.  We're all prone to
take it, but I hope your son doesn't.  In my experience I find that
nine times out of ten, when two courses of action offer, nature,
which is our weakness, points one way; and religion, which is our
strength, points another.  And religion's way is almost certain to be
the unpleasant one--so certain, in fact, that you may lay it down as
a rule the right way is always the one you shrink from."

"Well, I much hope they won't have no difficult and painful puzzles
to solve like that," said Mrs. Bullstone.  "At any rate at first.  If
they get used to each other and face life in love and understanding,
then troubles, when they come, will no doubt be met in a large,
Christian spirit by both, with love to lessen 'em.  But I don't fear.
There was only one sort of woman I wouldn't much have liked for
Jacob, and that's the light-minded sort--not the bad sort, but just
the light-minded, pleasure-seeking kind of woman, who can't see that
marriage is a serious subject, but flits after amusement where she
may, and takes the whole solemn business of life and death as though
it didn't matter to her, no more than it does to a butterfly without
a soul to save."

"There are plenty such, I grant," said Judith; "and the men that
hanker after that empty sort deserve what they get."

"Lord knows what anybody deserves," confessed Mrs. Bullstone.  "The
older you grow, the doubtfuller you be bound to get about rewards and
punishments, for whatever bounds the young break nowadays, they must
keep inside their characters; and to punish for wickedness they can't
help be, in honesty, no fairer than to reward for goodness that comes
natural.  However, I know you won't see with me there, because, in
your Persuasion, your text is 'Many be called, but few chosen.'"

"And don't life show the text to be true?" asked Mrs. Huxam.  "Don't
we see the many fail and the few succeed?"

"Leave that.  I'm talking of Jacob and saying how glad I am that he
never cared for the wenches who put their pleasure first.  My son has
had nothing to do with women, and you may say, till your Margery won
his heart with her beauty and simple, fine nature and, of course, her
worship of the dog kind--for dogs draw folk together in a way no
other beasts can--till then, Jacob's been heart-whole and come to
thirty-five without knowing the meaning of love.  So it's all poured
out for Margery; and that's why I'm telling you I feel it a great
blessing she's one of the self-contained, sober sort--not a gadabout
or hungry for admiration.  For if she had been, my son wouldn't have
liked it.  His admiration she'll get and keep for ever; but, if I
know anything, I should say he might be a jealous man and greedy as
the grave in that direction."

"I don't quarrel with that," answered Margery's mother.
"Jealousy--so to call it--ought to be there in reason.  But no sane
woman seeks to provoke it.  He'll have no cause for that, and I hope
my daughter won't neither."

They talked amicably and found themselves in agreement, allowing for
the difference of their outlook and convictions.  Judith perceived
that Mrs. Bullstone was honestly and deeply attached to her daughter,
and her study of Jacob led her to hope that he might furnish the
strength and force of character she held Margery to lack.  Yet,
within this hour, a thing had much disquieted her.  It was not very
great in itself, but argued faults in a vital direction--so Judith
feared.

The men called them out, and together all visited the kennels and
listened to Jacob expatiate on the subject of his Irish terriers.
Neither Barlow nor his wife liked dogs, but they were patient under
the ordeal.

Presently they walked beside the river and, after an early tea, the
Huxams started to return home.  Mr. Bullstone offered to drive them,
but Mrs. Huxam declined and held the exercise would do her husband
good.  Margery and Jacob accompanied them as far as Shipley Bridge;
then they parted, and while the lovers loitered by the river,
Margery's family proceeded homeward.

Judith preserved silence and her husband respected it.  She had not
spoken so much for a long time.  They walked through the gracious
evening light now roseal on the fields and hedges.  The slow miles
passed and still Mrs. Huxam spoke not.

Then Barlow lifted his voice as Brent appeared beneath them,
stretched like a grey cobweb on the green vale.

"All gone off very nice and pleasant--eh?  You've seen and heard
nought that wasn't convenient, Judy?"

"I've heard nothing, allowing for the difference between our clear
sight and the cloudy view of other Christians," she answered.
"Nothing I've heard, but something I've seen that was very
ill-convenient indeed, and I'm sorry I did see it."

"Dear me--I'm sorry, too, then," answered he.  "Nothing as can't be
righted, I hope?"

"The thing can be righted," she answered, "and for that matter I did
right it with my own hand; but the fault that committed the thing
goes far deeper.  It was in the parlour, where I sat with Mrs.
Bullstone.  And a very nice room too.  And on a shelf lay the family
Bible and upon it somebody had set another book!"

"Dear, dear," replied Mr. Huxam, displaying more concern than, as a
reasonable being, he felt.  "That's bad!  You never did ought to put
any other printed word on a Bible, of course."

"It's hard to think of a live Christian doing so.  But he'd laid down
a dog book on God's Word; and it went through me like a knife."

"It would; it would," murmured Barlow.

"I took it off before the man's mother.  I said no word, but just
took it off and put it aside and looked at her.  She didn't seem to
understand.  I'll tell Margery on Sunday."

"More thoughtlessness than wickedness, I'm sure," ventured Mr. Huxam;
but she continued to take a serious view.

"A man of thirty-five has no excuse for thoughtlessness," she
answered.  "It was indifference, and that makes it a very serious
thing."

Meantime Jacob and Margery wandered till the stars sent them
homeward.  They assured each other that all had gone very well, and
the girl declared how she had never seen her mother so bright,
cheerful, or talkative.




CHAPTER II

ON UGBOROUGH BEACON

There came an August morning when Margery and Jacob made holiday and
left Red House after breakfast to climb a famous hill some few miles
distant.

Bullstone designed to visit his two farms, which extended their acres
and lifted their homesteads upon the way; and they started, after an
early breakfast, with two of the red terriers for company.

The road ran west and brought them through ferny lanes, that twined
like a necklace beneath the border heights of the moor; while strung
upon them at intervals stood farmhouses in coomb and hollow, where
streams from aloft descended to the vale.  Round each dwelling spread
orchard and meadow and dark tilth; behind them heaved the grey hills,
now brushed with the light of the ling.

Bullstone Farm, the ancient abode of Jacob's family, first appeared,
and he spoke to his companion concerning the name.

"We were called Bullhornstone once," he said, "and on the old graves
at Ugborough village you can see slates dating back far more than a
hundred years under that name.  But I suppose some busy forefather of
mine found it was too much of a mouthful and dropped the 'horn.'  And
he dropped his luck at the same time.  My grandfather, who died here,
called himself 'Bullstone,' and there's a very good tomb to him and
my grandmother at Ugborough that I'll show you some day.  The
family's nearly petered out.  I am an only son; but I've got cousins
in America--in Kentucky--heard from one not six months ago."

Margery was interested by one detail of this narrative.

"How did your forbear drop his luck?" she asked.

"Along of a wicked wife," he answered shortly.  "No tale for your
nice ears, yet a common enough thing for that matter.  We're jealous
folk, or was.  He had a wife, and she had a lover, and Michael
Bullstone caught them together and slew the pair of them.  Then he
gave himself up; but women were a bit lower in male value then than
they are now, I reckon.  The case was plain, but the jury--married
men, no doubt--brought in Michael Bullstone not guilty.  It put the
fear of God into a good few wives I reckon.  But the strange part of
the tale is to tell.  He was forty when he killed them---forty and a
childless man.  But at fifty he married one of the Elvins, of the
same family that are at Owley Farm now.  Jemima Elvin he married, and
he had three sons and one daughter by her.  People said it was like
the tale of Job--only in that case the Devil took everything from the
man but his wife; and in Michael Bullstone's case, his bad wife was
the only thing he lost, and that by his own act."

"'Tis beyond belief to me," said Margery, "that a woman can ever roam
from the man she loves."

"Such good-for-noughts don't know the meaning of love," he answered;
"and you'll find such dregs and trash of women generally end in the
gutter, where they belong."

"Must be an awful thing if love dies," she said.

"Love doesn't die," he answered with ingenuous conviction.  "The
woman that can look on her husband with a cold heart never loved him.
True love is what you and I know--built for a lifetime."

"At first I was so proud, when you told me you loved me, that I
couldn't feel anything else but the pride.  It seemed too wonderful a
thing to have happened to such an everyday girl as me.  But when it
came home, then the secret love I'd hid for you burst out in a sort
of triumphant worship, till I felt, even if I died that instant
minute, I'd have had more happiness than any woman ever deserved."

He laughed at that.

"You're the old-fashioned sort, I reckon--content for man to be
master," he replied.  "Women don't think so much like that now
seemingly.  They want to run their own lives a bit more and be free;
but they'll soon tire of that caper and find security is better than
adventures.  You'll be the crown of my house and my mother's right
hand so long as she's spared; and I'll do the man's work and stand
between you and every wind that blows if I can."

"And well I know it," she said.

At Bullstone, the farmhouse stood back from the lane at the summit of
a steep hill, and everything was well ordered.  The whitewashed front
of the house shone in bright sunlight, only broken by the open
windows, and a great climbing shrub of buddleia, whose purple tassels
fell over the porch.  The roof was of Delabole slate, and behind the
farm, a rising copse straggled up to frontier ridges of Ugborough
Beacon.  Round about the farmyard stood buildings, mostly under
corrugated iron, that glittered silver bright, and in the porch sat
an old man shelling peas.

He saw Jacob and Margery enter the outer gate and came to welcome
them.

"Well, Mr. Catt, and how d'you find yourself?" asked the landlord,
shaking hands.

"Pretty peart, master; but seventy-five years is a middling load,"
answered the other, putting his hand to his ear.  "And who's the
young lady?  They tell me----"

"I know what they tell you, Matthew; they tell you; I've gone the way
of all flesh and fallen in love."

"So they do then; and this will be Mrs. Huxam's daughter."

He shook hands with Margery.

"A godly mother you've got, my dear, and a godly husband you'll have.
Come in and take a sup."

Jacob Bullstone's eyes were about the place while he smiled on the
old man.

"How's Mrs. Parsons?" he asked,

"Nicely.  She was here a minute agone.  Dogs I see.  When was you
known without a dog?  I'll call her."

Mr. Catt, who farmed Bullstone with a widowed daughter to keep his
house, brought them to the kitchen, and Margery praised the room.  It
was rosy-washed, of surprising cleanliness and bright with brass upon
the mantel-shelf and copper on the walls.  There hung two
warming-pans of ancient pattern and, between them, an 'eight-day'
clock.

"You're a thought slow," said Jacob; then came Milly Parsons.

"Wish you both good luck and good fortune," she said, shaking hands
with them.  "When's it going to be, master?"

"Next November, Milly; and I'm hopeful you and Mr. Catt will mind the
day and come along as my guests."

She brightened.

"Thank you, I'm sure.  A great compliment."

Milly was a thin, sallow woman with pale hair and a kindly, but
anxious face.  With her came a pretty little, fair girl of ten years
old--her daughter.  Milly raised her voice and talked to her father,
who heard badly.

"Mr. Bullstone's inviting us to the wedding next November, my dear."

"If I'm here, I'll gladly come," said Matthew.

Mrs. Parsons fetched a seed cake, two plates and two glasses.

"I was just thinking of 'forenoons," she said.  "Father likes a snack
about now.  He've been trying a cup of cocoa, and he catches a nice
bit of heat from it.  He's a cold, old man, because he can't travel
much about nowadays.  But laziness don't fatten him.  I wish it
would.  This is my daughter, Jane."

Mr. Catt nodded and smiled, aware that they were speaking of him, but
not hearing the words.  Margery made friends with the child who was
very shy.

"I've got an old coat lined with rabbit-skin and only a bit worn,"
said Jacob.  "Too hot for me in the coldest weather.  Would he take
it amiss from an old friend?"

"Not him," answered Mrs. Parsons.  "He'd be proud to wear a coat
after you I'm sure."

"He shall have it, then, next time somebody's along for Red House."

"Your father was always his great hero," continued Mr. Catt's
daughter.  "He often runs back over the past now and always says the
same thing.  He says 'Ah--ah--there were giants in the land in them
days, and George Bullstone was the best of 'em.'"

"I like to hear the old generation praise my father," answered Jacob.
"And now we must be gone.  We're holiday making I must tell
you--going to eat our dinner on top of the Beacon."

"And why not?  Not often you make holiday."

Mr. Catt accompanied them to the outer gate and, as they went on
their way, Jacob praised Matthew.

"Done for now--just waiting for time to throw him; but a rare good
farmer in his day, and he's got three understanding men, so
Bullstone's all right.  A lot of quiet wisdom in the old chap that he
didn't get out of books.  The Catts were as good as the Bullstones
once--yeomanry people like us; but they went down and we held up."

"There's a lot of Catts at Brent.  One's a job master, and father
thinks very well of him," said Margery.

"I wish Joe Elvin at Owley had a bit of old Matthew's sense; but he's
always under the weather--a complaining man.  Married to a good
woman, though a bit fanciful in her ideas.  She was upper housemaid
at Beggar's Manor, and you'll find women who have gone to service in
big houses pick up a lot of notions--some useful and some useless."

"Father, when he was a boy, took the first telegram that ever came to
Brent out to Beggar's Manor," said Margery.

"A funny name for an estate; but no beggars ever lived there in human
memory I should reckon."

Their way fell sharply beside an orchard beyond Bullstone and
descended into a valley, where through the green and tangled bottom
ran Glaze Brook.  The road crossed this little water by a bridge of
one arch, where, through a thicket of over-grown laurel, hazel and
alder, peered the grey ruin of Owley Mill.  But now its wheel had
vanished, its roof was gone and only shattered walls remained.
Beside the bridge stood a tall pear tree--a ghost of a tree draped in
grey lichens that fluttered like an old woman's hair from every
branch.  The venerable thing still lived; leaves struggled with the
parasite; scattered blossoms starred the boughs in early spring and a
few small fruits annually ripened.

"Still it stands--a hundred years old, they say, and may be more,"
declared Jacob.  Then they breasted the hill beyond and presently
reached Owley.  The farm showed fewer marks of prosperity than
Bullstone.  Green mosses throve on its ancient thatch, and the man
who here pursued his life was not much disposed to tidiness.

"Who'd think that this was the richer place?" asked Jacob.

On one side of the way spread the farm, with fields round about; on
the other stood Owley Cot, a pretty dwelling bowered in climbing
roses with two great red firs springing beside it.  Margery praised
the cottage.

"I always think that the dinkiest little home I ever saw," she said.
"But Mr. Elvin's mother ain't too contented for all that."

"Your home is nought if your heart's heavy," answered Jacob.  "She
knows that Joe is not particular happy, and he gets his cranky nature
from her.  Yet I'll be sorry if he's got to go."

"He pays his rent of course?"

"Oh, yes; but it drags a bit sometimes.  He's had a good year,
however; and his corn is above average as he admits himself, so it
must be wonderful."

They entered, and Joe Elvin--a tall, thin man with a long nose, a
black beard and a discontented face--himself answered Bullstone's
knock.

They shook hands and Jacob explained that he had called on pleasure,
not business.

The farmer welcomed them and took them into the kitchen, where his
wife was making pastry, and two little boys played in a corner with
the dried knuckle bones of sheep.

"Just want to introduce Mrs. Bullstone to be," said Jacob.

Mrs. Elvin, a handsome, big-built woman, showed pleasure and
congratulated the lovers.  Her little boys came and shook hands.
They were a well-mannered, cheerful pair and resembled their mother.

"Going to make farmers of 'em I hope, Joe?" asked the owner of Owley;
but Mr. Elvin was doubtful.

"Robert shapes for it," he answered.  "But Jack is all for the sea."

"That's because he doesn't know anything about the sea," asserted
Jacob.  "You keep him on the land, Joe.  There's little enough to be
picked up off the sea, by all accounts."

The men strolled into the yard presently, for Elvin had a sick
sheep-dog and Bullstone readily offered to see it.

"Just my luck if he's going to die," said Joe moodily.  "Best ever I
had, and sheep-dogs be so scarce you can't get a trained one over
distemper for money."

"He's not going to die," declared Bullstone.  "He's too thin--same as
you are yourself."

He prescribed for the dog and Joe continued to grumble until
Bullstone grew impatient.

"What the mischief's the matter with you?  Always grizzling for
nought.  A man in fair health with a good wife, a good mother and two
fine, healthy sons.  What more d'you want?"

Joe laughed mirthlessly.

"It sounds all right to your ears I dare say.  But if you looked
underneath, perhaps you'd find a different story.  Don't much matter
how good people are if they ain't good to you?  Nobody knows where
the shoe pinches except the wearer, and you've no right to say I'm
one of the lucky ones, because you don't know nothing about it."

"Don't meet trouble half-way, Joe, and keep your eye on the bright
side."

"Time's past for silly sayings.  Life's broke me and I know it; but
why it's broke me, and how it's broke me, be my own business."

"Rubbish and stuff!  Get some physic for your bad digestion and
you'll soon feel hopefuller.  It ain't life's broke you, but your own
low-spirited outlook on life.  Life don't break us.  It's the canker
inside spoils all when it works through.  You can't help being a
melancholy sort of man, I suppose.  That's your nature.  But you've
got brains in your head and reasoning powers, and you ought to fight
yourself and have it out, and balance your good against your bad; and
look round with seeing eyes and count how many can't hold a candle to
you for fortune."

"A canker inside is a very good figure of speech--a very clever
thought," admitted Mr. Elvin.  "And I'll tell you another thing: it's
not much use for them as haven't got cankers to preach to them as
have.  Us ban't born with cankers most times.  They grow, and I'm not
grumbling against my lot in particular.  I know there's many things
might be worse.  Only I've got in a state when I don't much like my
fellow-creatures, and I don't like myself no more than the rest."

"A foolish thing to feel.  We have our faults and our virtues also.
You ought to see the faults in yourself and the virtues in other
people.  At your gait, you'll end by thinking life isn't worth while
at all."

"I've thought that a powerful long time."

"Well, set about to make it worth while then--and if you can't make
it worth while for yourself--then make it worth while for your wife
and children.  Do that, and you'll mighty soon find it worth while
for yourself too."

"Sounds all right," admitted Joe.  "You wise blades always do sound
all right; but against a canker wise words be vain.  A canker was a
very true word, Jacob."

Bullstone preached a little longer, asked Joe to come and see him at
Red House and shook his hand in friendly fashion when they parted.

He sighed, however, to Margery as they entered Ugborough Plain above
Owley and began to climb the fern-clad bosom of the Beacon.

"There's a man Fate can't tempt to be sane," he said.  "And if I were
Fate and had the handling of him, I'd give over treating him fair and
knock him about a bit.  He's one of the sort that don't know he's
born.  He's asking for trouble, and his nature so poisons his mind
and blinds his eyes that he can't see his blessings, but looks
through and beyond into fancied woe that isn't there."

"Don't you know why?" she asked.  "Old Mrs. Elvin will tell you.  His
father lost his wits and was put away."

Jacob reflected.

"I'd forgot that," he replied.  "I'll mind it next time I have a word
with him."

They ascended by a vast but gentle slope to Ugborough's crown of
cairns, and presently sat at the summit, with the sun and wind in
their faces and their backs against the stones.

Beneath them extended the mighty prospect of the South Hams, a mosaic
of hamlet, forest and field, that seemed to be basking in the sun and
stretching itself like a living thing.  The varied colours of red
tilth and pasture were washed in air, brought together and made
harmonious.  Earth rolled hugely out to the dim skyline of the sea,
and westerly the Channel bit into the land, while easterly, Devon
rose and swept the great waters out of sight behind her cliffs and
ridges.  Knap and knoll ascended to break the coverlet of the fields;
here woods darkened the land and cloud shadows, vaster than they, hid
a parish in their passing and swept over the sun-soaked expanses, to
quicken the landscape with play of light and shadow.

"How tiny Brent looks from up here," laughed Margery; "just a grey
smudge and no more.  And Brent Hill, shrunk to no bigger than a slice
of cake on end!"

"It's good to get a bird's view sometimes," said Jacob.  "Steadies
the mind and makes you see things their proper size compared to other
things."

"But I was angry the first time I came up here, as a little one with
a school treat," continued the girl.  "Properly vexed I was, because
it seemed all wrong somehow in my young eyes that the houses should
be so small and the church and chapels no more than spots.  And
Marley Wood, that had always seemed to me the most wonderful place of
mysteries on earth, was just a dark dab no bigger than a
coal-scuttle, and the railway a thread, and the great thundering
trains no bigger nor faster than caterpillars!  It didn't seem right
to have things turned upside down like that."

"I bet you were glad to go down among the familiar sights again and
find they hadn't changed, Margery."

"But they had," she answered.  "I couldn't forget.  I tried--I tried
hard, but children remember so.  I hated the Beacon for days after
that, and was always glad when his head was covered with clouds, so I
couldn't see him.  I thought he was a wicked monster that had gone
and spoiled things I set store by, and showed me they were small and
mean compared to him.  But after to-day I'll forgive him."

Jacob felt mildly surprised at this unexpected glimpse into his
sweetheart's mind.

"Who'd have thought a chit of a child could get such fancies," he
said; "but I dare say girls are different from boys and dream all
manner of funny things like that."

"Don't boys dream too?" she asked.

"Maybe some do.  I never did.  All the same I like to hear about your
dreaming.  Pretty I call it."

"No, you don't, Jacob.  You'd call it silly in anybody but me.  But
so it was.  I made up things and told 'em to other children.  And I
tried telling 'em to my brother, Thomas, who was some years younger
than me.  He had a great contempt for girls, however.  He was just
short of seventeen when he died, poor little chap."

"Took after your mother, she says."

"Yes, terrible serious, and that good!  Goodness was his nature.
Jeremy's more like me."

"Your mother's a thought stern."

Margery nodded.

"Brings religion into everything," she answered.  "A wonderful mother
she's been.  You mustn't mind my seeing a lot of her after we're
married, Jacob.  The little that's good in me I owe to her."

"You're frightened of her?"

Margery considered this.

"I was--we all were.  A sort of love we'd got that didn't cast out
fear exactly.  But I'm not frightened of her now.  I trust her so in
every thing.  Where there's perfect trust, there didn't ought to be
fear."

"I feel a very great respect of her, but she's hard," declared Jacob.

"I suppose she is to you," admitted Margery, "and I'll tell you why
she seems so.  'Tis her great goodness and high religion.  Very few
can rise to it; and to everyday people mother does seem hard; but
it's only because most are soft.  There's a bit of jealousy also.
Because even good people know they can't be as good as she is all
round."

Jacob differed and held Mrs. Huxam to be narrow and self-righteous;
but he did not say so.

"Don't you fear I shall quarrel with her," he said.  "She's the
mother of my wife to be, and I'll be a very good son to her if she
lets me alone."

"She lets everybody alone when she can't help them," answered
Margery.  "She pours her whole thoughts and all her time into
religion and the shop.  It was a grief to her that I didn't go into
the shop; and, looking back, I always wonder how I didn't; but I was
such a one for out of doors, and father supported me, and doctor told
her I'd be a stronger girl if I lived in the air.  Till I was fifteen
I was a poor, pinnikin thing."

"Never!"

"I was then--you look at my first photograph, took with Thomas and
Jeremy.  But now I'm--so strong as a pony."

They ate their meal and Margery did most of the talking, while Jacob,
his hunger satisfied, lolled and smoked and listened to her.

Presently they set their faces northward and tramped Ugborough Moor,
their goal, Three Barrows, towering ahead among lesser hills.  Jacob
dearly loved the Moor and discoursed upon it for his sweetheart's
benefit.

"They are cairns, not barrows," he explained, when they stood on the
great hill; but Margery was occupied with her old thoughts.

"Now even Ugborough looks small," she declared, gazing down whence
they had come.  "He's not everybody, after all!"

The feminine view amused Jacob and he declared the unimportance of
size.

"It's not the greatness of a thing in bulk; it's the goodness and
fineness in quality that matters," he told her.  "Now we're lifted up
between two rivers.  Down there runs the Ernie and away beyond Zeal
Plains lie the famous 'rings' and your beloved Auna."

They talked of the 'old men' who had built the ruined pounds,
alignments and hut circles.

"Were they half apes, or creatures much like ourselves?" asked
Margery.  "Father says they were less than us, and mother doubts if
they had souls at all.  But mother says there can't be much hope for
any before Jesus Christ came, whatever they were."

Bullstone laughed.

"And little hope for very many that came since, if Mrs. Huxam's
right.  I trust you are a bit larger hearted in that matter.  It's
not often you see such a terrible, good woman with such harsh views
on the subject of heaven and hell as her."

Margery looked uncomfortable.

"It's hard to think so few be chosen; but of course there's chapter
and verse for it," she answered.  "I dare say a lot more will be
saved than mother fears."

"A bootless business," he answered.  "After all, there's no higher
thought for living man than his duty to his neighbour; and if you do
that, you'll mostly find you're doing your duty to yourself.  God
forbid I should quarrel with your mother; but I won't pretend,
Margery; I don't go all the way with her and I'm glad of it."

The girl did not reply and he talked of the Moor.

"The 'old men' are gone," he said, "and be sure they were men and
women as good as we, if not so clever.  They lived hard for certain,
but I dare say they had their bit of fun, if it was only fighting;
and as for goodness and hope of salvation, who are we, with all our
comforts and inventions, to deny goodness to them, or the eternal
reward of goodness?  Why in the name of charity must nine out of
every ten humans that come into the world be doomed to hell?  What
did the Lord die for, Margery, if all the doubtful characters are to
be damned?"

"Leave it," she said.  "I feel same as you; but I haven't thought
about such fearful things and more have you; but mother and father
have.  You must give them best in that matter, please, Jacob."

She was pained and they fell silent for a while.  The man resolved to
enlarge her ideas presently, and felt a smoulder of indignation that
a creed so ugly to him should have seared the mind of an innocent and
happy girl.


They still held north over wild lands with the heights rolling about
them; then they reached the ancient Abbot's Way, running east and
west, and met Auna's stream near Huntingdon Cross, a granite memorial
from olden time.  Less than five feet high it stood above the heath.

"Here's the Forest Boundary," said Jacob, "and now we'll get to the
Warren House yonder, rest a bit and start for home.'

"I always feel sorry to turn at the end of a great day," she
answered, "and this is the greatest day, but one, that ever I have
lived."

He kissed her.

"And that one was the day you asked me to marry you, Jacob."

"Don't I know it?"

The Warren House stood before them under a ragged sycamore.  It was
almost the loneliest inhabited dwelling in Devon, and its squat,
white face peered out upon the wilderness from under a black,
tar-pitched roof.  The rabbit warrens spread on either hand and the
dwelling lay in the protection of a tumulus that piled up to the
northward.

"I love this forgotten place," declared Bullstone.  "In some
moods--not now, but once when I was younger and less content than
now--I've thought it would be a very good place to live, beyond the
fret and cark of life."

But Margery shivered.

"I'd have to be broke in mind and body and not wishful to live at
all, before I'd live here," she said.

Indeed the spot was somewhat melancholy and calculated to chill a
cheerful spirit.  Death seemed to have made this place a home.
Evidences of mortality stared round about.  In one corner of the
little yard was a heap of bones, and suspended from a low bough of
the sycamore, there hung a flayed horse by a hook.

"I'm sorry for my pretty Auna that she has to pass up here," declared
Margery.  "She must be properly glad to wind away down into our
beautiful valley and come to Red House and Shipley Bridge."

"You should see Auna Head," he answered,--"that's where she rises, in
a desert of bog and cotton grass under Ryder's Hill.  Lonesome there
if you like.  Hardly will you hear a bee booming and never see colt
or head of kine.  Nothing but the pad marks of a fox and the sweep of
his brush in the mud.  We'll ride up some Sunday when I've got your
pony.  Now let's go in, and you'll see two men that are so nearly
content as ever I knew men to be, for all their loneliness.  Father
and son they are."

"I know them well enough," she answered, "I've often met 'em coming
in with rabbits when I was exercising the dogs."

"The deuce you have!  And never told me?"

She smiled at him.

"Benny Veale's a good-looking chap, and his father's a fine old man
and kindly."

"I'm hearing things," exclaimed Jacob.

"You get to talk to a lot of people out with the puppies.
Everybody's so interested in them."

"And interested in you, I reckon.  Well, you won't walk puppies and
talk to strangers much longer."

Now came a riot of life in the shape of the warrener's dogs.  Half a
dozen lean, wiry creatures, barking and gambolling, ran before a man.
They worked for him on the warren, and the dead horse represented
meals to come.  They wagged their tails and saluted the Irish
terriers in friendship.  Benny Veale followed them--a sun-tanned, red
lad in a blue sailor's jersey and long boots.  He was carrying a
dozen dead rabbits, but threw them down and saluted the visitors.

"Who'd have thought to see you, Mr. Bullstone!" he exclaimed,
grinning at Margery.

"Where's the governor?" asked Jacob.

"He'll be along direckly minute."

"Can you give us a cup of tea, Ned?"

"Ess I can, then; I'll make it."

"How's the rabbits?"

"No lack--just getting busy again; but us don't do much for a
fortnight yet."

He lifted his voice and shouted.

"Here's Mr. Bullstone come up over, father."

Then an old, bent man appeared from the hillocks of the warren.  He
walked with a long stick and was bowed in the back and lame; but he
revealed a cheerful countenance and proved an elderly edition of his
son, though his red hair was nearly white and had dwindled to little
patches above his ears.  Upon his head not a hair remained.

He beamed from a mouth wherein teeth were few.

"So here's the she!" he said, first shaking Margery's hand.  "And I
wish you both luck I'm sure.  'Tis a terrible blow to Benny I can
tell you, for he's been chattering about you, Miss, ever since he
first catched sight of you along with the little dogs."

Benny did not hear this jest: he had gone in to prepare tea; but
Jacob did hear and little liked it.

"You're getting too old for this place and this job," he said.
"About time you took your bones down to the village, Frederick."

"Granted," answered Mr. Veale.  "I did ought to be gone; but I say
that every winter, and yet find myself up for one more season come
summer again.  I'm better this year than what I was last."

"You look very well indeed, Mr. Veale," declared Margery.

"The point of the wedge is in," confessed Frederick humorously.
"Death have got it among my bones, and will hammer it home in God's
good time; but my vitals is all working very suent yet, and if I
sleep a lot, I'm wonderful between whiles."

They entered a rough, unclean kitchen cumbered with trappers' tools.
Jacob was not at ease and regretted that they had come.  He cut short
Benny in some simple gallantries and having drunk a cup of tea,
declared that they must push forward.

But Mr. Veale protested.

"Bide a bit," he said, "and smoke your pipe.  Us don't have visitors
very oft I warn 'e."

"I do trust you be going to ask us to the wedding, Miss," ventured
Benny, who could not take his eyes off Margery's face.

"I'd like for you to come," she answered.  "I hope there will be a
brave rally of neighbours I'm sure."

"You'll be married from the post-office, of course," assumed Benny's
father.  "Trust Mr. and Mrs. Huxam to do it in good order.  But be
she willing to go to Church, or can the Chosen Few hold lawful
marriage?"

"It's going to be in Church, because Mr. Bullstone's Church of
England," explained Margery.

"And when do it happen, Miss?" asked Benny.

"Next November."

Jacob gave each man a fill from his pouch and the talk ran for a time
on dogs; then he rose to depart.

"Well, may your love adventures all turn out well and fine," said Mr.
Veale, "and the Lord remember you and be good to the pair of you."

Benny shyly took a sprig of white heath from a jam jar, where it
stood in water.

"Found it yesterday.  Please accept of it, Miss."

She thanked him and guessed he had intended to present it on the
following day, when it was probable they would have met at Shipley
Bridge--she with her puppies, he with a cart of rabbits on his way to
Brent.  But before Huntingdon Warren House was lost on their homeward
way, Jacob asked her to drop the flower.

"I don't like that sort of nonsense," he said.  "The young man made a
hole in his manners offering it, in my opinion.  I'll forgive him
this time, because he used to be a sailor and they don't know better."

Margery instantly flung away the blossoms.

"A mannerless oaf," added Jacob, "else he'd have known wiser than to
stare at you as though you were a show.  I'll ask you not to take
note of him if you meet him again without me."

Margery wondered and her heart beat a little quicker.

"Isn't he a good sort of man?" she asked.

"For all I know; but the woman that's going to marry me needn't
trouble whether any other man's good or not."

"That's true," she said, smiling to herself.  "I never thought about
how good you were when I began to love you--only how wonderful and
precious.  Love don't take much account of goodness or badness I
reckon."

"Very often not, till too late."

"Then it's a bit of added fortune to fall in love with a right good
man," she said.

"Safest no doubt.  But I wasn't quite like you.  I did take into
account your goodness; and I wouldn't have let myself love you, as I
do love you, if you hadn't been better than gold.  If I'd found you
were light and didn't take life seriously, I should still have been
interested in you and anxious for your future and wishful to advance
it; but I shouldn't have fallen in love with you, Margery."

"You fright me when you say that," she answered, "because we all know
lovers can't see straight; and now I shall fear you'll find me not
half so good as you think."

"There--there; now you're fishing for praise!  You know yourself very
well; and if you hadn't been my sort, you wouldn't have fallen in
love with me.  And don't you be fearing I'm too serious and like to
bore you.  I love life and the good things of life, though work's the
best of them and wears best.  But we won't miss the junkettings and
revels now and then; though with your upbringing, I shouldn't wonder
if you proved a thought more stiff-starched than I, for all my age
and experience."

They chatted very joyously together and then a good thing happened,
for in the shaking moss, where a spring was born and bubbled up out
of the granite, Jacob marked a piece of bog heather, white as snow,
and though he had to wade half up his leggings to get it, he did not
hesitate.

"There!" he said, "there's your white heather, and now you've got
your luck from me and none else."

"I'll treasure it up for ever and ever," she said.  "I've got my luck
from you--that's a true word in the sight of God; and I hope a time
is coming when you'll say you've got your luck from me."

"Luck's a poor word," he answered.  "I've got my new life from you,
Margery.  All that's coming means you--all."

"Who laughed at me and said I was talking poetry on Ugborough?" she
asked, with the evening light on her dark hair and in her eyes.

Jacob put his arm round her.

"What I say isn't poetry--unless God's truth be poetry," he answered.

So they came home together beside the river.




CHAPTER III

THE RESCUE

Two persons, ignorant of each other's presence, sat nigh the river on
a windy day in October.  The latter rains had fallen, the springs
were unsealed.  Each rillet was swollen to a gushing stream and the
rivers ran in torrents.  North and south they shouted from their
drowned fountains and hurried a mighty volume of cherry red and spumy
water back again to the Channel and the Severn Sea, whence it had
come.

Auna, running riotously high above her summer bed, hung dead sticks
and withered foliage on inundated branch and bough, to mark her
progress and leave a signal of her autumn frolic.  She shouted, wild
as a mænad, and leapt from rock to rock, swirling here, flinging
wide, glassy billows there, and submerging each familiar stock and
stone along her banks.  The height of the freshet was over and the
river had already fallen a foot from her torrent of the day before.
Now sunshine filled the valley, while the fires of the fall flashed
on oak and beech and the last of the rowan berries.


On Shipley Bridge sat a man smoking and waiting to keep an
appointment.  He was to meet Benny Veale from the warrens, and beside
him, in a limp heap of grey and white fur, lay a dozen dead rabbits.

Adam Winter, the new tenant of Shipley Farm, was a man of thirty with
a fair, commonplace face.  He stood only five feet eight, but was
well built and strongly put together.  He wore a small moustache and
a little patch of sandy whisker before each ear.  His pale blue eyes
were kindly, the expression of his face amiable, easy and rather
wistful.

He had failed at Brent and lost half his capital, an inheritance from
his dead father; and now he was trying his luck again on a smaller
place, with the moorman's privileges of turbary and grazing.  A
maiden aunt kept house for him, and his right hand was an elder
brother, Samuel Winter, a man weak-minded and lacking in
self-control, yet resolute to work, happy in solitude and not
difficult to manage.

Adam had made a start and being of a temperate and reflective nature
in most affairs of life, faced the future without fear.  He was not
ambitious, or concerned to do much more than keep his aunt and
brother and himself in solvency.  Five years earlier he had been in
love in a tepid fashion, but his romance came to nothing and its
failure left him cast down for a short while only.  He soon
recovered, but revived no ambition to wed.

Here, then, he lingered with the sun on his back, appreciated the
gentle warmth, smoked his pipe, listened to the thunder of the river
in the gorge beneath him and perceived that the granite bridge
vibrated to its rough challenge.

A heavy network of boughs hid the valley above him.  Otherwise he had
observed the only other occupant of the spot, where sat Margery on
her favourite ledge, now only just clear of the water.  The pool
beneath her remained calm no more, but was alive and dancing and
deep.  The bottom had disappeared in the peat-soaked current, and
little argosies of spume trembled here with bursting bubbles, while
half the backwater was hidden under the honey-coloured churnings of
the river.  Her favourite, smooth reaches were no longer smooth; her
laughing stickles were drowned.  All heaved and rolled with unwonted
weight of waters, and against the deep baying of the river, Margery's
puppies lifted their shrill yap.  Above her crossed the arms of oak
and ash; upon the banks the fern was down and the tawny brakes spread
sodden purple under much rain.  Beneath this point, Auna narrowed to
a cleft, where an augmented waterfall now tumbled into the gully
below.

Margery sat and brooded, for the day was one of eventful character in
her life.  To-morrow her reign as kennel-maid at Red House would end;
she was to return home and not reappear until after her marriage.
Happiness dominated her mind; yet there were regrets.  Never again
would she wear doublet and hose; and that grieved her, for she loved
this attire and marvelled why women should be denied such seemly and
convenient raiment.  It was a small thing, yet not to be relinquished
without sighs.  And she would be queen of the puppy dogs no more.
The busy, russet creatures, growing sturdy now and ripe for
discipline, still made her the centre of their activities and joys.
Their eyes were ever uplifted to her, for she was their god--the
benignant power that ordered their world, chastened them, cheered
them and encouraged them, applauded them, made games for them, flung
fir cones for them, consoled them in disaster, shared their joy,
filled their little, ever hungry bellies.

Now they nosed her and squeaked into her ears, while she sat with
elbows on knees and chin in hands as motionless as the grey stones.

"Oh, you duckies!" she said aloud, "how am I going to say good-bye to
you even for six weeks?  But half of you will be sold and out in the
world before I come back."

She pushed them away and the pups scattered to pursue their pleasure.
They were wide awake to the meaning of water and she felt no fear for
them, but concentrated on herself and the days to come.

There stole into her heart a feeling that the past had been too good
to continue long.

"It isn't often what's good turns into what's better," thought
Margery.  "My days can't be so perfect for ever, if what mother says
is true."

Then suddenly, without one preliminary monition, Mrs. Huxam's
prophecy was confirmed, and the rag of many colours that men call
life rent for Margery and revealed a new thing.

She heard a sudden howl of terror from a puppy, and leaping up, saw
one of her charges in the river.  Two playing on the bank had rolled
together at water's brink, and in a moment one was over.  The current
tumbled the small thing away and swept him into the main channel.  He
now bore down upon Margery, who stood ten yards below, and she
perceived that the sole way to save him must be by wading to the
central tide, where it gleamed between two shallows a few yards above
the fall.  If she failed, the terrier would certainly go over and
make an end of himself.  He was drowning already, with terrified eyes
and black nose lifted, while he swept downward like a dead leaf,
beating the water with his paws.

She did not hesitate, but dashed in at once, knee deep, thigh deep,
all unconscious of the forces against her.  She intercepted the
little lump of red hair, grabbed him, and then, finding herself
powerless to stem the heaving water, took both hands to the puppy and
flung him five yards to the bank.  Happily he fell light on broken
fern, where he lay shivering, shaking and weeping till his brothers
found him.

To plunge before the stream had been easy but, against the flood
water, return proved impossible for Margery.  The river converged and
held her now at the centre of the current, where its energies were
concentrating for the fall.  She heard the roar behind her and felt
fierce hands thrusting her backwards toward it.  She strove to fight
forward, but her long, slim legs were not built to oppose such power.
She swayed, and as she lifted one foot, the other was instantly swept
from under her.  Now she was up to her waist and in another two
seconds off her feet and rolled over.  A yard above the waterfall her
head and shoulders were heaved up and she tried to catch a rock in
vain.  Then she screamed, with the terror of sudden death in her
voice, and a moment later vanished in the great, amber-coloured roll
of the river, as it swept to its fall.

Her cry had been heard, though it seemed doubtful whether a human
being could survive that shattering drop, even if the rocks were
merciful.  But Adam Winter caught the shriek and, jumping to his feet
and peering under the boughs, was just in time to see a human arm and
leg thrust from the resounding arc of the waterfall and hurled into
the welter of foam beneath.  He knew the place and wasted no time.
He judged that some foolhardy boy had fallen into the water and been
swept to destruction; but the scream made it clear that the victim
had come to his ordeal with plenty of life in him.

Winter scrambled down the bank, flinging off his coat as he did so.
If any thought passed through his mind as he automatically rushed to
his task, it was one of annoyance that he should be called to a
business so unpleasant.  The discomfort troubled him more than the
danger; indeed for him there was little danger.  He jumped over a
bank into the river, found it reach to his middle and then ploughed
up from the shallow end of the hole to the deep water under the fall.
The place was dark and full of the din of the water.  He saw a hand
sweep up and disappear; then he left the ground and swam a few
strokes to the boiling dance of the foam.

Good fortune favoured Adam, for he came straight upon Margery's
floating body, held her before she sank again, got his shoulder under
her and so swam the little distance necessary to reach foothold.
Then he stood up, gripped her round the waist and presently carried
her clear of the river.  Not till he found her hair all over his face
did he know that he had saved a woman.  He brushed it away and
recognised Margery; then, in great dread that he carried a corpse,
set out with her to the Red House.  His own place was nearer, but
Adam felt impelled up the valley.

The girl remained quite unconscious.  She was not heavy and he made
good way, finding time to wonder what had brought her into the river.
Then the puppies appeared and crept in doubt and dismay round him.
To see their god limp, silent, still, thus carried in a man's arms,
appalled them.  They barked and whimpered, but would not lose sight
of their guardian and followed in an agitated company at Winter's
heels.

Thus they came, until Bullstone, proceeding under the fir trees to
find Margery, suddenly discovered her in Winter's arms.  The blood
surged up to his face; he stared; he snorted and then charged forward.

"What in God's name----?" roared Jacob; then he dropped his ash
sapling and almost snatched the unconscious girl from Adam.

"Fell into the river and went over the rocks into the pool," said the
younger man quietly.  "Please the Lord she ain't dead.  I don't think
she is."

Jacob was panting.

"For any man but me to touch her!" he almost groaned, to himself
rather than the rescuer.

Winter stared and stopped.  He was about to explain events, but Jacob
strode away, the puppies streaming behind him.

He lifted his voice and bawled for help before he reached his door.
Then Mrs. Bullstone hastened and found him already beside the kitchen
fire.  He lowered Margery to the ground, bade his mother undress her
and went for brandy.

Returning with it he found the sufferer had regained consciousness.
She could not speak but her eyes were open.  She drank; then Jacob
went for blankets and within ten minutes had left the house, hastened
to the stables and saddled a horse.  He quickly galloped off to Brent
for a doctor and Margery's mother.

In time they arrived, to a turmoil of talk and tears from Mrs.
Bullstone--a dislocated, agitated upheaval in which Judith Huxam and
her daughter alone preserved calm.  The physician found Margery
bruised and cruelly shaken, but without a broken bone.  There was
concussion, how severe he could not immediately determine.

He directed them and asked a question of Jacob before leaving.

"How did she get in the water?  Not intentionally I hope?"

For the last time that day Bullstone was staggered beyond reason.

"'Intentionally?'  Good God, doctor, she's engaged to marry me!" he
said.  Then happened a strange thing, for in the morning, Margery
proved already better after sleep, and sitting beside a convalescent
sweetheart, Bullstone was reminded of one he had forgotten.

With deep emotion he came to her and gasped to see how small Margery
appeared, sitting up with a pink shawl round her shoulders and her
hair down.

Out of his joy and to steady himself, he blamed her--even assuming an
angry manner.

"Properly mad, and must mean a screw loose in you," he said.  "To go
into a raging torrent like that for a puppy!  You never thought of
me."

"Of course I thought of you," she answered in a weary, little voice.
"It was your dog and I had to save it.  But in truth I thought of
nothing.  I was in the water before I began to think."

The threatened shadow seemed still to hang over her.  Her voice was
weak and her manner listless.

"I'd give ten years of my life if it had been me who rescued you," he
said.  "It's proper gall to think that any other man did it."

"You must forgive him--for my sake, Jacob."

"Forgive him!  The mischief is that I'm under a life-long obligation
now, and he may be the sort to rub it in.  Not that he'll need to.  I
shan't forget that my debts are for ever beyond payment."

"Have you thanked him?"

"Not yet."

She was silent and then expressed a desire that startled her lover.

"No more have I.  But I'm not going to let the day pass before I do."

"I'll say all there's need to say."

"No, Jacob.  Life's life.  I'm properly thankful not to be drowned.
Think what he's done for me!  If you say a word against, you'll vex
me, and I mustn't be vexed."

The subject dropped while she talked of her accident--such of it as
she remembered; but she felt desirous to know the exact sequel, and
that only Adam Winter could tell her.  When Jacob put her off and
told her to trust Winter to him, she became quite silent.  Then she
asked him to leave her.

He went and presently the doctor called and gave a good report.  He,
too, brought discomfort, for Margery had repeated her wish to thank
Adam Winter, and begged that she might do so immediately.  She was
wilful and strangely insistent, as it seemed to Jacob.  Her mother,
however, supported her and held it a right thing to happen.  The
doctor therefore advised that Mr. Winter should see her before she
slept.  He had found Margery so completely recovered that there was
no need to call again.

"Keep her in bed one more day, and then let her get up and stop by
the fire," he said.  "Youth will never cease to astonish me."

Jacob Bullstone went to Shipley Farm after midday dinner and summoned
Adam Winter.

"You've done more than I can pay, as you well know," he said, "and
that's granted; but if it's ever in my power to lessen the
obligation, I gladly shall, for I little like to be in any man's
debt."

"No need to talk that way.  There's no debt and no obligation.  Who
wouldn't have done the same?  Didn't Miss Huxam go in the water
herself after a puppy?  We do these things, not for any return, but
because we must.  I'd have done as much for a sheep--so would you.  I
hope she's out of danger?"

"She's wishful to see you--nothing will do but she thanks you herself
this instant moment."

"No need at all."

"So I say--no hurry anyway; but that's her will and she must be
obeyed, if you please."

"Them caught from the grave like that did ought to be humoured," said
Adam's aunt.  She was a little woman with grey hair and a red face.

"I'll come, then, if it must be so," said Winter.  "The green plover
be back, and I shot a brace this morning.  Will she accept 'em?"

"No, thanks; I'll get a bird or two for her presently."

The men returned together.  Their walk had been silent on Jacob's
part, while Adam related the particulars of the rescue.

"I properly thank you," said Margery, when they ascended to her room
and Adam took a chair in the window, while Bullstone stood with his
hands in his pocket at the foot of the bed and Judith Huxam sat
beside it.

"We'll never, never forget it, Jacob and me," continued Margery.

"I hope you will, then," answered the farmer.  "Why such a noise
about it?  Duty's duty.  In fact 'twas more of a pleasure than a
duty, I'm sure, and if I hadn't much feared you was a goner, I should
have enjoyed the fun."

Jacob's eyes were restless, he frowned and moved about.  Then he
turned his back and examined some family photographs on Margery's
mantelshelf.

"To save a life is a great thing, Mr. Winter," said Mrs. Huxam.
"Now, whatever your own life's got in store for you, you can always
remember that you had a hand, under God, in keeping a human creature
alive."

"The puppy's no worse," declared Margery, "and if he knew which it
was, Jacob would never part with it.  But we never shall know, for I
don't remember which I saved.  You must be terrible strong to have
faced that awful water.  It took me like a leaf."

"Wasn't the water's fault," he answered.  "Young women can't go
playing about with the rivers in flood.  A little item like you was
bound to be swept away."

"It's a wonderful thing to look at a man who's saved your life," said
Margery.

"Wish I was a finer object," he replied.

Jacob hid his emotion, but had to speak and occupy himself.  The
invalid was nursing two young puppies from the last litter.  She had
demanded something to play with.

"Best let me take them back," he said.  "Mustn't keep Mr.
Winter--he's a busy man.  And mustn't spoil young dogs.  Bless it,
you're cuddling them as if they was a brace of babbies!"

"They are babbies," answered Margery, "and if you can't cuddle
babbies, what should you cuddle?"

She was wilful still and continued to speak in a tired, small voice.

"Are you fond of dogs?" she asked, and Adam declared that he was.

"What's life without 'em, I say," he answered.

"So do I," she replied.  "Jacob can't see the human side of dogs--no,
you can't, Jacob.  He's all for discipline."

"Quite right too," declared Winter.  "You must put into the heart of
a dog his bounden duty from the first, else he'll grow up a nuisance
to himself and everybody else.  Work did ought to be found for every
dog.  If it ain't, they think life's all play and that makes 'em
selfish."

"Jacob's the whole law and the prophets about dogs," asserted
Margery.  "They're blessed creatures and nothing's too good for
them--you know you think so, Jacob."

"They haven't got souls, however," explained Mrs. Huxam, "and you had
no sort of right, Margery, to run the risk of drowning for a dog."

"Some dogs have got far bigger souls than some men," answered her
daughter; "and you've only got to look in their eyes to see 'em."

"That's a wicked thing to say, and I'm sorry you said it," replied
Judith.  "It shows your mind is wandering still and there's fever
left in your brain.  So these men had best to be gone.  You forget
your religion, Margery."

The girl was silenced, but Adam Winter, who did not fear Mrs. Huxam,
ventured on a doubtful joke.

"The dogs have got religion anyway," he assured them, "for I'm sure
the little ones worship your darter, ma'am; and the big ones worship
Mr. Bullstone."

"'Tis a great thing to search to the heart of a dog," murmured
Margery, "and nobody ever did that like Jacob."

Adam Winter, conscious that his last remark had annoyed Mrs. Huxam,
though she did not answer it with words, got up to go his way.

"Mustn't bide no more," he said.  "And I hope you'll soon be down
house and as right as rain, Miss."

She stretched out a hand and he took it and stood a moment on his way
to the door.

"Mind you come to our wedding," bade Margery.  "I will have you
there; there wouldn't have been a wedding at all but for you."

"I'll gladly come, be sure."

He went through the door, and Bullstone followed without speaking.




BOOK I


CHAPTER I

JEREMY

The market town of Brent differed but little from like boroughs
linked by the artery of the railroad to centres greater than
themselves.  It grew, reacted to the ordinary stimuli and, upon
discovery of Dartmoor as a healthful resort of pilgrimage, enlarged
its borders to meet increasing demand.

An environment was created after the usual pattern, and from the
village centre of shops and cottages, there extended good roads on
which stood single and semi-detached houses with gardens about them.
The class of shop improved to serve the class of customer; the
atmosphere thickened from its primitive simplicity.  Change
increasingly dominated Brent, creating an environment wherein to be
honest and fearless grew more difficult, while cowardice and
hypocrisy were encouraged by the nature of things.

Human capacity was displayed at its customary levels; greed and
creed, after the inevitable rule, dominated the minds of men and
women and infected the minds of the children.  Education progressed,
but its evidences were often painful, and, along with it, things
worthy of preservation departed for ever.  Modern education promotes
selfishness and egotism in the pupil, but neglects any valuable
formative influence on character--the result of that narrow and
unimaginative type of man and woman foremost in the ranks of the
certified teachers.

Ambition at Brent was only understood in terms of cash; among many of
the young men and women cleverness became only another name for
cunning.  They were brought up, generation after generation, on the
ideals of their parents, which proved a far more penetrative
principle than the teaching of their schools.  Then dawned class
consciousness and class prejudice; and the fresh point of view took
shape in creation of new values and animosities.  The timid admired
the bold, who had courage to scant his service, yet draw his wages.
The worker who robbed his employer, confident that trade unionism
would support him in any open conflict, became the hero of the shop;
while the employer retaliated without patience or perspicuity.  Thus
worthless and unsocial ideals were created in minds upon the way to
adolescence.

The church stood in the midst--architecturally a very beautiful and
dignified object.  Its significance otherwise only related to form
and ceremony.  So many had ceased to go, that the timorous began to
feel they, too, might stay away without suffering in reputation, or
trade.  There were various chapels, also, and a few spirits reflected
the past and professed obsolescent opinions, while a small minority
still actually practised them.

Of such were the postmistress and her husband, Judith and Barlow
Huxam.  To the Chosen Few they belonged--the woman from her birth,
the man by adoption; for Judith insisted, as a condition of marriage,
that Barlow must join her particular sect and he, much in love and of
no deep convictions, did not hesitate to oblige her.  And still the
pair worshipped with that mournful denomination, while the Chosen Few
lived up to their proud title and became yearly fewer.  This fact
brought sorrow, but not surprise, to Mrs. Huxam.  Fewer, indeed, were
chosen, for the good reason that fewer deserved to be.  She took a
long view, and though admitting that her own generation was painfully
distinguished by a lack of just persons in all classes, yet hoped
that better times might be coming and subsequent humanity provide a
more handsome inheritance for the Kingdom.

Apart from her religious predilections, Mrs. Huxam was stern, but
reasonable.  She knew that offences must come, while regretting that
more appeared to come from Brent than most other places.  She was not
censorious, though glad to remember that the mills of God always
ground small in the long run; and she never wavered in conviction
that all was for the best and divinely preordained.

Her husband she honoured and respected, and indeed he was a man
worthy of respect and honour.  He had earned admiration and applause,
for to have lived with Judith through thirty-five unclouded years
argued great gifts of patience and philosophy on the part of Mr.
Huxam.  They worked in perfect amity and their drapery establishment
was still the most important shop in Brent.