He changed his coat and hat and left the house quickly; then, before
reaching Shipley Bridge, he turned right-handed up the hill, skirted
the copse that crowned it and plunged into the shaggy pelt of the
slopes behind Red House.  Hence, himself unseen, he could observe the
valley beneath him and the path that passed along beside the river.
He moved fast and had soon reached his destination and thrown himself
into a hollow over which stood a naked thorn.  Here he was invisible,
while his eyes commanded the vale beneath.  He could see Winter
beyond the river islets and mark his fox-terrier working through the
fallen brake and tangle--a white spot in the sere.  Nothing else
moved and he panted from his swift actions and watched the vale.
Then shame rose, like a fog, and chilled the ferment of his mind.
What had he done?  Fired by opportunity, driven by awakened, raging
lust of doubt, he had abandoned his rational purpose for the day and
set another trap for Margery.  What was he now doing?  Having lied to
her, he was spying upon her in cold blood.  He revolted against the
naked vileness of such a statement and sought to clothe it in
sophistry, that it should be bearable.  He assured himself that he
did his wife no wrong, since she was ignorant of his action and must
ever remain so if innocent; while, for himself, this test, painful
though it was, might prove a godsend and reassure his mind and
cleanse his doubts for ever.  If she did not come, a weight must roll
off him and peace return; if she did come, he would see her actions
and measure the significance of them.  In either case he was
justified.  And while he argued thus, he felt the sickness of his
soul.  He planned to give her half an hour, then he would go on his
way to Brent and do what he had promised to do.  He was too far from
the valley in his present watching-place and now moved down, sulking
like a fox through the gullies on the hillside and keeping out of
sight of any possible spectator.  He proceeded a hundred yards, then
found a ridge above a badger's holt--a hole between two blocks of
granite that supported each other.

He reflected with his eyes on the valley and each moment heartened
him.  He heard Winter's gun--the faint report of two barrels fired
quickly one after the other, but Adam was now out of sight.  That he
should in reality be shooting was a good sign.  He had evidently not
taken the gun as a blind, with his thoughts elsewhere.  Reason strove
with Bullstone.  Only twenty minutes remained and then he would be
gone.  From beneath the river lifted its murmur in the clear cold
air.  The low sun had already withdrawn behind the hills and the
valley lay in shadow, while the sky above it was full of light.
Jacob felt the contrast between this purity and peace and his own
spirit.  Again and again he dragged out his watch and wished that
time would hasten and liberate him.  Before the end he had grown
conscious of great evil within him and suffered despair under his
weakness--the passing despair of a drunkard, or gambler.  Then he
heard a rustling and a trampling.  His milch goats had wandered up a
green lane in the hill, where grass extended through the banks of the
fallen bracken.  There were half a dozen of them and a kid or two.

Seven minutes yet remained to complete the half hour and Bullstone
was already preparing to be gone.  Then he saw Margery.  She entered
the valley from a gate beyond the kennels and came forward.  She wore
a red woollen coat and a white sunbonnet.  His eyes grew hot and he
felt his heart beat so fast that a mist blurred the conspicuous
vision below.  For a few moments he lost her and rubbed his eyes.
She did not reappear and he lay staring at the empty valley and
hoping he had only seen a shadow conjured out of his own thoughts.
Then a slight, brown figure appeared and he saw Auna running after
her mother.  She, too, was lost and another moment later Jacob
perceived his wife ascending the hill.  She lifted her voice and he
understood that she was only there to call in the goats.

Thus he was thrown from one shock to another: now thankful that she
did not come; now sickened before the sight of her; now again
conscious that his fears were vain.

Auna caught up with her mother and he heard their voices.  Then, in
the gust of a great relief, he was confronted with his own position.
The goats were now above him and in a few minutes Margery and his
daughter would be at his elbow.  Auna ready ran forward and it was
too late to get away without being seen and recognised.  He panted in
agony, knowing what this must mean.  Then he remembered that the
presence of the child would at least create a respite.  He turned and
pretended to be examining the badger's burrow as Auna approached and
saw him.

"Father!" she cried out, and then shouted to her mother.  She ran
into his arms, never stopping to wonder what had brought him here,
and then Margery, who much wondered, joined them.  She knew her
husband's face exceeding well and with a sinking heart read the
truth.  Yet before she spoke, she strove to banish her conviction.  A
man might change his mind and many things were strange--even
terrible--until one heard the explanation which banished both mystery
and fear out of them.  But Jacob was not a skilled liar and he had no
art to invent any plausible excuse.  Indeed he hardly tried, for he
knew that his wife would understand.  He said something about the
badger, that had killed four hens and bitten their heads off a few
days before, and declared that he had found its home; Auna was well
satisfied and hoped the wicked badger would be punished for his
crimes; while Margery fell in with the explanation, as long as the
child was with them.  Indeed she said nothing and, as Auna chattered
and they rounded up the goats and brought them homeward, she asked
herself what she should say.  She was in no hurry.  She saw clearly
what had tempted Jacob to spy, and she knew that he must perceive the
truth was not hidden from her.  And yet she argued that, perhaps, he
did not know that she knew.  Margery asked herself which was the
better of two courses open: to inquire, as though she had forgotten
his mention of Adam Winter, what had really made her husband hide on
the hill, or to challenge him and reveal that she perceived he had
set a trap for her and fallen into it himself.  She was silent
through the candle-light hours of that evening, and still silent when
Avis and Auna had gone to bed and she sat alone with her husband.
There came a deep yearning for confidence, for some wise and
sympathetic ear into which she might pour her tribulation.  From pain
she passed into anger presently, and anger determined her future
action.  She felt the sting of this cruelty and not guessing how
opportunity had wakened Jacob's weakness, or that he had striven
against a power beyond his strength to conquer, a natural indignation
overwhelmed her.  The futility and horror of such a life crowded down
upon her soul; and it came with the more intensified forces because
of late she had fancied an increase of frankness and understanding in
Jacob.  There had been no cloud for a long time and he had retreated
less often into the obscurity and aloofness of speech and mind that
told of hidden troubles.  But this outrageous act destroyed hope and
swept away any belief in an increasing security.  All was thrown down
and the man's deed revealed to her that still he could not trust;
that he was even capable of telling her a falsehood in hope to catch
her doing something he thought wrong.  She asked herself how often he
had already done this?  She guessed that the watcher, whom she had
hoped was gone for ever, still spied upon her; that this was not the
first time he had played with her honour thus.

Therefore anger swept her and there came a quick determination to pay
her husband in his own measure heaped up.  How often had he imposed a
barrier of silence between them; how often had she not heard his
voice addressed to her for the space of a long day?  Now she would be
silent; but her silence was edged with a subtler sharpness than his.
He would indeed be dumb, save before the children.  She was not dumb.
She, instead, assumed a cheerful manner and spoke as usual of many
things, only leaving the one thing untouched that she knew was
tormenting his mind.  She made no allusion to it and when, alone with
her, he braced himself to endure her reproaches and confess his fault
with penitence, the opportunity was not granted.  Then he felt driven
to take the first step and abase his spirit before her; but he could
not and, while he turned sleepless in bed beside her, and she
pretended to sleep, their secret thoughts pursued them.  He began to
think she was wise to abandon the incident; he praised her in his
heart; he suspected that silence meant an angelic forgiveness.  And
then he tried to convince himself that, perhaps, after all, the
matter had not deeply interested Margery; that she had not linked his
return with any evil purpose, or even remembered that he had told her
Winter was in the valley.  He often changed his mind, as Margery
knew, and though she must have guessed that the badger was an excuse,
yet his real object had possibly not occurred to her at all.  He
longed to believe this, but his reason laughed at him.  He returned,
therefore, to the conviction that, out of her charity, she had
forgiven his weakness, and he felt it would be wisest to let time
pass, that her wound might heal and no more pitiful fawnings and
confessions be demanded from him.

He thought to wake her and show her that he understood her nobility;
but she appeared to sleep so well that he did not disturb her.  And
she, meantime, wondered in whom she might confide.  She considered
her father, but believed that he lacked the comprehension to
understand; neither could she go to old Marydrew, who had wit enough,
but was Jacob's own nearest friend.  Jeremy was too young.  Then she
determined to tell her mother.

Her resolution did not weaken with morning, and still Jacob could not
find it in him to speak.  The emotional conclusion of the previous
night remained, while the emotion itself was gone.  His customary
reserve and love of silence woke with him, and it occurred to him
that Margery might, after all, intend to speak in her own time.
Therefore he kept silence.  She only told him, however, that she was
going into Brent, with Auna, to see her mother, who suffered from a
cold and kept her bedroom; and after dinner on that day Margery set
out with her younger daughter.

Bullstone walked to Shipley Bridge with them, then still farther, to
the cottage of Billy Marydrew; and there he took leave of them and
entered.

Margery proceeded, wondering curiously if Jacob shared her intense
desire for the opinion of a third person, whether, indeed, he had not
already poured his terrors into some other heart.  A woman certainly
never had won his troubles; he hardly knew half a dozen; but it might
be that he confided in William Marydrew.  She was silent as they
tramped the leafless lanes to Brent, reached Aish upon the hillside,
descended over Lydia Bridge to the town.  Here she and Auna parted;
her daughter went straight to the Huxams, and Margery turned into her
brother's shop.

Jeremy stood behind the counter and revealed a gloomy mood.  He was
the father of two children now, and the second proved to be delicate.

Unaware of his depression, Margery praised the shop window and the
general air of prosperity which her brother had created.

"It's wonderful how you've got on," she said; "a born shopkeeper, as
mother always told us."

"Yes, that's true enough," he admitted, "but I'm afraid I'm reaching
my tether here.  Flesh and blood can only stand a certain amount, and
to live with what you hate is a fearful strain.  In fact to spend all
my life in an odour of fruit and vegetables and never escape from it,
is beginning to age me a good bit."

"What does the smell matter, if you're making and saving money?"

"It matters to my nerves," explained Jeremy.  "I've reached a pitch
of proper loathing now against the contents of this shop, and nothing
but a sense of duty keeps me here.  I've got to go on with it, I
suppose, though at a cost none will ever know; but if people, who are
supposed to care about me, only realised how I hate the very touch of
fruit, they might combine and give a thought to the situation."

"What would you like to sell?" she asked.

"Nothing you can eat," answered Jeremy.  "I'll never handle food
again if I once escape this heavy cross.  I'd sooner live my life
among coal-scuttles and dust-bins than with food--especially fruit
and vegetables.  Never again in my born days shall I touch a fruit.
If I could go into dry goods to-morrow, there's no doubt I should
thank God; so would Jane for my sake.  However, while the business
sticks to me, no doubt I shall be expected to stick to it--sickening
though it is."

"A pity you didn't go into mother's haberdashery."

"A very great pity," answered her brother.  "When the assistant was
away, you'll remember I did lend mother a hand, while Jane looked
after this show; and the relief--to move among materials and refined
things, like gloves and ties and so on, and everything clean and
scentless!  However, life's life; I must bite on the bullet and
endure as long as my nature will let me."

"I'm afraid that won't be long," she answered, "for once you get out
of heart about a thing, it's soon 'good-bye.'"

"I had it in my mind to ask Jacob for some advice," replied Jeremy.
"I've got a very great respect for his judgment as you know, and
though I'd not care to put myself under an obligation to many men, I
wouldn't object at all in his case.  He did me one very good turn,
and though, as a huckster, I failed in the long run, if he had some
other equally brilliant idea up his sleeve, it might be just the one
thing my nature craves."

Margery threw out not much hope, but promised to speak to Jacob.

"I'm sure he'd help you, or any of us, if he could.  His one pleasure
in life is helping people.  All the same he won't be able to
understand your point of view this time."

"Not only point of view, but smell and touch," explained Jeremy.
"Let him ask himself what he'd feel if his dogs were swept away and
he had to live with nought but a parcel of cats.  Then he'll see what
I'm feeling.  Tell him I want to get away from the fruits of the
earth, and never wish to see one of them again; and I'd sacrifice a
lot to do so, and so would Jane."

She left him then and proceeded to her mother's.  She felt disturbed
that Jeremy should have failed once more.  But she smiled to hear him
talk of 'biting on the bullet.'

"I know what that means better than ever he will," thought she.

Then Margery reflected concerning her own purpose, and, having
already determined to speak to her mother, now asked herself what she
should say.  When it became a question of spoken words the difficulty
appeared, for she was no longer in the temper to experiment with any
words at all.  Her mood had changed from anger to melancholy; she
weighed her proposed speech and doubted whether, after all, Mrs.
Huxam had better hear it.  Something suddenly and forcibly told her
that her mother would not be vague or neutral in such a matter.  To
confess to Judith would certainly entail following her mother's
subsequent directions, and Margery much doubted what they might be.
She was still divided in mind when she joined Mrs. Huxam.

The elder sat by a fire in her bedroom, with a shawl wrapped round
her head.  From its whiteness her face peered, also pale.  Her eyes
were heavy and her breathing disordered, but she was wide awake
listening to Auna, who read the Bible and laboured diligently for her
grandmother with the Second Book of Kings.

"'And Jehoash did that which was right in the sight of the Lord all
his days----'" piped Auna; then she broke off and beamed.

"Oh, granny, isn't it a blessing to find somebody who did right
before the Lord--for a change?"

"It is," croaked the old woman.  "Few ever did and few ever will."

Auna, liberated from her record of faulty monarchs, left Margery with
Mrs. Huxam and joined a young woman who operated in the post-office
below.

"It's on your chest, I'm afraid," said Judith's daughter.

"I'm better, however.  I shall be down house in a couple of days."

"Take care of the draughts then.  February's always your bad month."

"No month is worse than another if you trust the Almighty," answered
Mrs. Huxam.  "How's your husband?"

"Jacob's all right."

"No, he isn't all right, and he never will be while he holds off his
Sunday duty.  With them who keep live animals, Sunday has got to be
broke in a manner of speaking; but he ought not to let the dogs come
between him and public worship, and well he knows it."

"It isn't the dogs.  He hates a crowd," said Margery.

"Then he's all too like to spend eternity in one.  Yes, Margery, I
wish very much indeed I could feel more content about Bullstone's
future."

In the light of these serious words, Jacob's wife felt little
disposed to set out of her own sorrows.  Indeed they were forgotten,
since her instinct was instantly to respond to the challenge.

"He's always doing good things."

"So you may think, and so may he think; but if your Light is
uncertain, what looks good may be in truth be bad.  There's a lot
done that shallow minds applaud for virtue, when the truth is the
motive is wrong and the deed worthless, if not evil.  And be that as
it may, we well know that works without faith are of no account."

Margery changed the subject, yet introduced another that could not
but redound to her husband's credit.

"The foundations of the house are dug I hear, mother."

"They are.  The villa residence will begin to come into a fact as
soon as we can trust the weather.  We shall want your help in the
garden, for we don't know anything about flowers."

"I shall dearly like to help.  I long to see you really resting at
last."

"I am content to let it be as it will, knowing that what happens is
right.  I wonder sometimes what the Lord will find for my hands to do
when we retire; because, though we speak of retiring, that's no word
for a Christian mouth really.  The Christian never retires."

"No, you'll never retire from doing good and helping the people to do
good--I'm sure of that.  Has Jeremy told you of his troubles?"

"Me first, of course.  I'm weighing them.  I've laid them before the
Throne.  With Jeremy one has to remember that he was made, by his
Creator's wish and will, a little different from everyday men.  He's
got great gifts, and though one could wish he'd been a Pulleyblank,
even to wish it is wrong.  When he was here for a bit, while Miss
Mason went into a nursing home, Jeremy delighted me.  He belongs to
the old generation of shop people and has got the touch--hands like a
woman and a great power of letting a customer think he's having his
own way, when in reality he is not."

"He hates the green stuff and fruit."

"He feels that he was intended for higher lines."

"I'm going to ask Jacob about him.  Jacob would like to pleasure him
again if he could."

"I hope so, I'm sure, Jeremy being your brother and my son.  But I've
got my ideas in that matter.  Now you'd best to go home.  The dark's
coming down and I've talked enough."

"Would you like some of our goats' milk?  It's wonderful rich in
cream.  It's often done me good."

"Yes," said Mrs. Huxam.  "I should like some of your goats' milk, if
you can spare it."

Margery and Auna set out for home, the child richer by a shilling
from her grandfather.

"I cheered him up about grandmother," she said, "because if she was
very ill, she wouldn't have been so interested in the Kings of
Israel, would she?"

Her mother speculated with amusement on Mrs. Huxam's view of Jeremy's
character, and thought how Judith must have regarded such a spirit in
another man.  She was in a good temper and glad that she had not
grumbled.  Her nature was built to bend before the blast and she was
always quick to react to any improvement in her circumstances.  She
considered, whether, after all, it might not be better to speak of
the recent past to Jacob himself, and resolved that she would be
guided by his future attitude.  If he remained under the cloud, she
would endeavour to dispel it; but she trusted that in a few days he
might emerge.

They brought good news, for Auna now produced in triumph a telegram
which Barlow Huxam himself had taken off the wires and entrusted to
her, while Margery was with her mother.  The child had not told
Margery, but now produced the treasure for her father.

The Red House terriers had taken two first prizes.  Auna begged to be
allowed to keep the telegram and add it to her treasures.

"It will be the greatest of all," she said, "and it's signed 'Peter,'
so it must be true."




CHAPTER XIII

THE ORANGES

Bullstone's monument of madness was nearly completed.

One day he met Adam Winter talking to Margery and Avis, as he
returned from Owley Farm to dinner, and anon, in the kennels, Avis
asked the meaning of words that Mr. Winter had spoken to her mother.

"He said some people have to take their pleasure like a dog snatches
a bone--with an eye on the whip--father.  What's that signify?"

"Who was he speaking about?"

"I don't know.  He said it to mother, and she laughed and told him
that pleasure took that way would be half pain."

"It means--it means--nothing at all.  Just a way of speaking.  Hungry
dogs will steal bones--and whips will find 'em, soon or late.  And
all pleasure's half pain when you grow up.  The thing is to be young,
like you, Avis.  Then pleasure's real I hope."

"Would you like for me to marry Bob Elvin, father?"

"Would you like to?"

"He asked me last Sunday going to chapel, and I said I would; and
he's coming next Sunday to beg we may be tokened."

An idea so great had occupied Jacob's mind fully enough at another
moment.  But now there was no room for it.

"I knew he was going to, yet didn't think he'd have the cheek for
another year."

"I love him with all my heart, and grandmother thinks he's a very
good, proper-minded young man.  She's agreeable; but she says it
mustn't be for a full year, till I'm over eighteen."

"Quite right.  I'll talk to Master Bob next Sunday."

"Are you vexed, or pleased about it?"

"Why, I'm both, my dear.  Vexed to think how the time flies--vexed in
a sort of way to find you're wife-old.  Yet that's foolishness, isn't
it?  And pleased that you've fallen in love with an honest,
hard-working man."

"You won't dress him down, or say he's looked above him, or anything
like that?"

"I don't know what I'll say.  Certainly not that.  Run in now.
You've given me something to think about."

"Mother likes Bob very much indeed."

"I don't know anybody that hasn't a good word for him."

"And I'm well thought upon too, father."

"Why not, Avis; why not?"

"Nothing can ever come between me and Bob," she said, then left him,
and he forgot her instantly.

His thoughts drifted through the familiar channels and he read
pregnant and personal things into Winter's jest.  He began at the old
starting point, strove to bring a judicial mind to bear upon the
question, asked himself, for the thousandth time, if he had ever
found a cause to suspect any man but this man, or associate with
Margery the name of another.  He remembered that with some
exceptions, now faint in vanished years, he had never done so.  Once
or twice during their early married days, a dog-fancier had spoken to
Margery in words too free and easy for his taste; but no man remained
in their united lives save Winter.  His wife was not a woman who
particularly enjoyed male society, or strove to challenge the other
sex.  So far as he knew, her acquaintance did not number a dozen men
of her own generation.

To this fact he always returned, and it increased rather than abated
his tribulation.  He told himself, falsely, that had she appreciated
male society and been at her best and happiest in it, innocence would
be far easier to assume; he assured himself that he would not have
minded that.  But there was only one who could not be shut out of her
life and who, despite handsome inducement to do so, would not go out
of it.

The words overheard by Avis might mean much; and even more importance
he attached to Margery's answer.  A woman who was doing wrong with
her eyes open, and suffering accordingly, was just the woman to have
replied so.

He worked himself into a fever and fell upon days of gloom darker
than the weather.

Accidents contrived to throw Shipley Farm much into his thoughts, for
illness fell upon it.  An epidemic that was filling half the homes of
Brent with sickness reached the vale, and first Amelia was stricken
down, then her younger nephew.  Both were seriously ill for a time
and the old woman's life became endangered.  The parish nurse was too
fully occupied to assist them, and since neither could be moved, it
became a needful charity that their neighbours lent necessary aid.
Samuel Winter tended his brother, while a cousin--one of the nurses
from the Asylum not far distant--obtained leave to wait on Amelia.
The old woman survived, but was kept in her chamber for some weeks.
Then the nurse left again and Avis and Auna were glad to be of daily
service.  Adam also began to recover.  Margery, however, so far as
her husband knew, had not visited Shipley Farm during the progress of
this misfortune.  He neither forbade her to do so, nor commented on
the fact that she kept away, though, according to his custom, he
weighed its significance and now felt glad and now read more into it
than appeared.

Of late he had sometimes struggled from his torment by the road of
preoccupation, and striven to busy himself for other people.
Opportunity did not lack, for the winter was long and hard, and there
came a day when, out of good-will alone, he set off to visit an old
man--a friend of his dead father--who lived at Totnes and was
reported in the extremity of need.  Only the workhouse waited for
him, nor did Bullstone know any means to avert this doom, since the
ancient soul lived on after the world could offer no other place for
him; but Jacob departed to inquire if anything might be done, and it
was understood that he would stop at Brent on returning from Totnes,
sup with his father-in-law, who desired to speak with him, and return
at a late hour to Red House.

The day was overclouded from the north and snow promised to fall ere
long.  Those who best understood the signs prophesied a stern spell,
for frost had hardened the ground and the temperature kept very low.
At noon the sun sometimes moistened the ice and thawed a little of
the mud; then the frost returned as the light failed.  Fruit-growers
welcomed the cold to hold back bud; but farmers, now beginning to
expect their lambs, desired it not.  As for Jacob, the weather braced
him physically.  He set off, took train to Totnes and presently found
himself anticipated.  The old man whom he had gone to cheer was
stricken with illness and already comatose.  He did not recognise
Bullstone, and his visitor, glad rather than sorry that death had
come to the rescue, retraced his way, being informed that money could
not add to the dying man's comfort, or prolong his life.

Having heard that oranges were a valuable fruit against the epidemic,
he thought to take a dozen home and leave them at Shipley Farm.  He
debated this problem in the train on the way back to Brent, and
argued long with himself as to the propriety of such a step.  He
found himself uncertain, yet the idea had thrust into his mind and he
hesitated to dismiss it.  He regretted having thought of it; then he
grew impatient with himself and determined to follow the impulse.  He
told himself that, whatever value might be set upon his gift, his
motive was one of pure kindness.  Then he pictured Winter receiving
the oranges and perhaps laughing in secret as he accepted them.  Once
more he determined not to take them; but pursued the subject, in his
laborious fashion that ever magnified trifles, and again decided that
he would do so.  It was typical of his mind, at this season, that
already it began to lose sense of proportion; and while he
exaggerated every incident involving the inhabitants of Shipley Farm,
upon other far more momentous matters, he decided instantly and not
seldom more swiftly than sound judgment had warranted.  He was
impetuous when he might reasonably delay, and where no question
really existed and the problem's solution mattered nothing, he would
fret and exhaust himself.

On reaching Brent he entered the shop of Jeremy Huxam to make his
purchase.  Jane was serving, but called Jeremy as his brother-in-law
appeared.  Then she put the oranges into a bag, took the money for
them and left her husband with Jacob.

"I haven't forgot you are wishful to drop this," said the elder; "but
shops are not in my line as you know, and it's a pity, if you ask me,
that you can't stomach this work, especially as you've done so well
at it."

"I'm not going to throw up the sponge, be sure," promised Jeremy.  "I
shall fight on till the right occupation offers.  But, if the inner
nature turns and the gorge rises, then you may be sure you're not
doing the work you were planned to do.  However, I shall come to it.
I always trust the future and I always trust my fellow-man.  I've
been a square peg in a round hole all my life, Jacob; but after such
an apprenticeship, I feel tolerable sure that the next billet will be
the chosen one.  Jane and I have shone through a fog ever since we
have been married you may say; but fog or not, we have shown our
light and done our best, and my mother is as certain as I am myself
that my gifts are only kept back."

"Haberdashery you're craving for, so Margery tells me."

"My natural bent I believe to be there," admitted Jeremy.

"Then look ahead and keep your mouth shut," advised his
brother-in-law, who could see farther into the fortunes of other men
than his own.

"Stop where you are," he continued, "and leave the future to time.  I
should have thought you could see that the big chance is coming for
yourself without any help."

"You're a deep one," murmured Jeremy, "and what you see was also seen
by another good friend--the best I've got in the world.  I mean Jane,
of course.  She hinted in secret that when father and mother retire,
it would be in the course of nature for me to go to the post-office
and take on the shop.  But they haven't mentioned it and I'm far too
delicate minded to do so.  Not that I couldn't rise to the
post-office as well as the business--I could; but I mustn't touch
such a great subject yet."

"You needn't touch it.  But stop whining over the smell of green
stuff, and keep a stiff upper lip, and show yourself a good man of
business and keen and capable at figures and so on.  Then your
parents will come to see for themselves you can fill their shoes
presently, and very likely invite you to get well into the saddle
with their help before they go.  Jane's trustworthy and clever, and
you're the prime favourite with your mother.  She's a human being
where you're concerned, and you know you'll win her right enough.
And your father would far sooner pass the business over to you, and
keep his hand on it, than sell."

Jeremy brightened.

"He would, because then his occupation wouldn't be exactly gone,
would it?  He'd look after me, and it would take a considerable
amount of his time, I dare say."

Then he praised Jacob.

"You've got a business head without a doubt," he declared.  "It's a
great thing to have an eye that pierces the future like yours.  I
have the habit of looking ahead also, but my future's never too clear
to me.  However, I've got undying hope.  I beat you there.  And if
the chance offers with father some day, you might sound him--just in
a vague and delicate way.  It's high politics and I wouldn't trust
myself, nor yet Jane, to breathe it.  But it might very well come
from you, I dare say.  See what Margery thinks; I know my good's
hers."

Bullstone restrained a contempt for his brother-in-law, which he had
always found compatible with good-natured regard, and promised to
hold the matter in mind.

"I'm supping with them to-night by appointment," he said, "and I'll
get over there now, for the governor wants to see me; but I shan't
mention these high matters yet a while; and meantime you put a good
face on your oranges and lemons and show yourself a little sharper at
pounds, shillings and pence."

Then he took his bag of fruit and went his way.  Dusk had come down
and only a golden eye or two from some small shop window shot the
gloaming.  It was nearly dark at six o'clock, and though no flake had
fallen, the air already to Jacob's nose seemed to smell of snow.

Mr. Huxam was out when he reached the post-office and from a remark
that related to the far past, Jacob plunged into deep waters.  His
mood was amiable, but, as often happened with his mother-in-law, from
whom the passing years separated him more and more widely in opinion,
conversation tended to exasperate him and run him into extremes of
statement he would not have uttered in a calm moment.

On this occasion, he had himself to thank and, looking back
afterwards, perceived the tremendous significance of that encounter.

There had died a man concerning whom few good things could be said.
Marsden Blake, a landowner of wealth and position, who succeeded his
father as lord of Brent manor, had been killed while shooting big
game in Africa.

For the Huxams the tragedy possessed some interest, since it was this
man whom their eldest son had died to save nearly twenty years ago.
As a boy he had stopped Blake's runaway horse and preserved the young
man's life together with his companion's; but he had lost his own in
so doing.

Jacob reminded Judith of the fact and how she had told him that
Providence had permitted the death of Thomas Huxam for a good end,
destined some day to appear.

"What d'you think of that matter now?" he asked.  "Are you going to
say that Blake wouldn't have been better dead and your son better
living?  What's Blake's record?  A wife that died of a broken heart,
a wasted estate, gambling, wrong-doing and now dead--smashed to rags
and bones by a rhinoceros on the Zambesi."

"Yes, and what's my son's record?  What do you suppose he's been
doing these twenty years?  Better work--far better work than even he
could have done on earth.  He went, because he was ripe to go; and as
for the other, he had his chance, as the worst have, but his end was
preordained.  If there'd been good hidden under his evil, then, when
a young saint died to save him, he would have seen the Light, like
Paul, and understood his Maker's mercy and turned to the Cross.  But
he was lost from the womb, and the one good thing you can say about
him is this: that the Lord used him as a tool in the matter of
Thomas--not Thomas in the matter of him as I thought at the time."

"A funny tool--a drunken, dissolute sweep like that to blot out your
fine boy."

"God uses strange weapons--strange in our eyes, yet always perfect
for His purpose."

History repeats itself and Jacob answered in a phrase of Xenophanes,
though of that sage he had certainly never heard.  But thoughts of
men echo and re-echo down the centuries, as conditions are iterated
by the reverberation of history.

"Doubt is extending over everything," he said, "and you stand for a
sort of faith we seldom see, mother.  In my young days we spoke with
a good deal more certainty than our children do; but all institutions
are weaker than of old.  The Law's weaker, the Church is weaker,
faith is weaker.  There's a spirit abroad to run black into white and
turn everything grey.  Bad men ain't hung like they used to be, but
wrangled over and often let off for false pity; sermons ain't
preached like I used to hear.  Everything's toned down and softened,
and modern parsons will go through their discourse without daring to
name hell."

"How d'you know that, since you never go to church?" asked Mrs. Huxam.

"My neighbours tell me.  I hear about the changes from my friend,
William Marydrew,--a great church-goer and very keen in his
intellects, for all his years.  He says that in the old days the
clergy used to thunder and flash the Word down, like lightning, on
the people; but now they argue and palter and mark time, so that folk
go out of church as doubtful as when they went in.  It's all
education, and men's brains getting larger and their sense of justice
increasing."

"Don't you think it," answered Judith.  "Their brains will land
mankind in the madhouse at the rate we're going in some directions.
Are right and wrong other than right and wrong because godless men;
for their own base ends, try to mix 'em?"

"I don't know; but I do know that a good deal of the world's work is
standing still thanks to education.  Labour has got such a lot to
talk about nowadays, that it spends half its time chattering; and the
money is always the subject nowadays, never the work that's supposed
to earn it."

"Weak faith is the sin at the back of all our troubles; and the
world's pretty ripe for the avenging Hand so far as the faithful can
see," she answered.

"I don't believe that.  Laws are made for the living, not the dead.
We labour too much under--not the avenging Hand, but the dead Hand.
Everything changes, including our standards of faith and duty.  I
heard a chap say last week--a sober, decent man too--that life was
quite difficult enough without being handicapped by the Ten
Commandments.  Of course he was joking, but you see the point."

Mrs. Huxam did not see the point.  She retorted sternly and told
Jacob that he was little better than an atheist to question the
enduring quality of inspiration.

"It's all of a piece," she continued.  "Man is losing sight of his
Maker at every turn in the road.  We talk of Anti-Christ and don't
see that Anti-Christ is already among us, netting souls by the
hundred thousand.  The abiding consciousness of the Divine Presence
is lost--gone.  This generation hardly knows the meaning of the
words.  And what follows?  The men and women are false in wedlock,
false in fatherhood and motherhood, false in business and false in
faith.  There are new, sham gods being lifted up, and you--you, my
daughter's husband--are worshipping 'em with the rest.  You pretend
it isn't so; but your words condemn you."

Jacob laughed, for he had thought long upon these things and slipped
farther from his old guides than Mrs. Huxam knew.

"'Consciousness of the Divine Presence' a guarantee for honesty in
business!" he answered.  "Why, my dear woman, it isn't even a
guarantee for honesty in the pulpit!  How many of the parsons are
honest, or dare to say what they know is the truth?  And we
laymen--look round.  Take Ireland--two camps of men fighting like
devils, with 'consciousness of the Divine Presence' the bedrock of
all their quarrels.  And our so-called Christian Government--what
would become of that, if, for one sitting of Parliament, it put 'the
Divine Presence' before practical politics and diplomacy?  No, no;
'consciousness of the Divine Presence' don't make men honest, I
assure you, mother--not even such as say they believe in it."

She glared at him and turned very white.

"God help your wife and children then," she said.  "If I had known
you hid such poison as this in you, I'd sooner have seen Margery in
her coffin than----"

Barlow Huxam came in and his wife left her sentence unfinished.

"We've all got a right to our opinions.  Our conduct, not our words,
will judge us, mother."

"Another lie," she answered, and rose and left them.

Jacob expressed regrets and hoped that Barlow would make his peace.

"I let my tongue run," he confessed, "but I didn't mean to vex her."

Mr. Huxam, however, when he heard particulars, took rather a serious
view of the controversy.

"I'm sorry you touched religion," he declared, "because on that
subject Judy's--however, I'll explain you were not in earnest and are
properly contrite.  But don't you put loose opinions into your
children, because, if she caught a doubtful word in their mouths,
there'd be a flare-up and harm done beyond mending."

"Their mother teaches them, not me.  Auna's the only one who sets any
value on me," answered Jacob.

Mr. Huxam brought out the plans of the villa residence.

"I'm wishful for you to see the creation of the house," he said.
"Young Tremayne, of Exeter, drew it and I think well of it.  I was
hoping that you'd persuade Judy about the bath-room; but your light's
out with her to-night I'm afraid.  She says the Pulleyblanks, and the
Twelve Apostles, and a lot more celebrated people never had a
bath-room, and therefore it's a vanity and vexation.  But I argue
that such an invention stands well inside Christianity, for there's
no word against cleaning yourself in style and comfort.  The world
won't stand still."

"That's what your wife is so angry about," answered Jacob.  "She
thinks that if your faith is sound, you ought to stand still, no
matter what cry goes up to get a move on and take the iron hand of
worn-out uses off the people.  We rot under festering laws that the
Church won't lift, for faith, and the State won't touch, for dirty
policy.  You stand out for your bath-room."

"It's part of every modern villa residence and must go in I reckon;
though whether I shall have the pluck to use it, time will show.
Judy would expect me to be struck dead by lightning--still the
opportunity may come, and the younger generation will prove there's
no danger.  That's one thing education have done anyway--the people
wash a lot more than in my youth; but Judy always says it's too fatal
easy to cleanse the outside of the platter."

Bullstone praised the plans of the house and looked forward to
visiting the site at a later date.

"There'll be no building for a minute," he said, "for we're in for a
real pinch of winter.  However, I'm never feared of February cold."

"The snow has begun," answered Barlow.

"Then I'll get home and not sup with you--for that reason and
another.  I mustn't anger Mrs. Huxam any more to-day.  Better you
tell her I've gone home, with my tail between my legs; but hope to
make my peace next time we meet."

"That's wisest," admitted his father-in-law.  "I'll say.  you're
terrible chap fallen and didn't mean a word of it--just some nonsense
you heard in the train--eh?  All well at Red House?"

"All well, and my father's old friend at Totnes is fast going
home--didn't know me."

"All well with him then."

Jacob left the post-office without seeing his mother-in-law again.
He did not much regret hurting her, for he felt that her attitude to
life was obsolete, and he had no wish that his children should grow
up self-righteous and bigoted.  He was in a good temper when he set
out and saw flakes of snow drift past the oil lamps that lit the
township.  They fell fitfully as yet, but grew thicker as he climbed
the hill and set his face northerly for home.  He was comfortable and
warm, for he had drunk before leaving Brent.  His old teetotal habit
had been of late years abandoned and he took spirits after his day's
work.  The night was very dark and he felt glad to have escaped
supper at Brent.  The Red House supper was taken about nine o'clock,
and he would now be home before that hour.  At Shipley he turned into
the farm gate, where a powder of snow already whitened the earth.  No
light shone from the ground floor of the farmhouse, but a dull red
glow outlined one bedroom window, while the others remained in
darkness.  The door was closed, but knowing that Miss Winter still
kept her room and slept much, Jacob did not knock.  Instead he lifted
the latch quietly and entered the kitchen, which opened down a
passage-way behind the parlour.  The place was empty.  A candle
burned low on the table and beside it stood a jelly in a pudding
basin.  A peat fire was sinking on the hearth.  Bullstone set down
his oranges, and proceeded to leave as quietly as he had come.  He
was already in the stone-paved passage at the foot of a little stair,
when voices from above arrested him.  He heard his wife and Adam
Winter.  Each spoke once, and in the silence he marked every syllable.

"Quick--quick--there's a dear," exclaimed the woman.

"Come, then--come," said the man.

Then he heard Margery laugh.

Within five seconds the thing had happened, and for another five he
stood without moving, without breathing.  Then he turned to rush up
the stairs; but he did not.  There was no need for that.  In another
five seconds he had left the house, closing the door behind him.  It
was over--the long-drawn agony had ended and he stood justified in
all his woes.  At last the truth stared at him without one shadow to
make doubtful its hideous face.  He leapt to accept it.  An
indefinite relief settled upon him as he went panting home, for he
could now make peace with his own soul.  Already he had planned the
future.  He was amazed to find how his mind worked.  He marshalled
his thoughts coherently and vividly.  He swept over many
subjects--the children, their future, the new order of events at Red
House, when his wife was gone and the place emptied of her for ever.
Then only would his own heart and conscience become pure again and
the muddy currents of life run clear.  The dominant emotion at this
moment was one of thankfulness that he had been right, for the
possibility that he could still be wrong had ceased to exist and
immeasurable relief attended its departure.

The children were surprised to see him and when he asked Auna for her
mother, the child said that she had gone to Shipley with something
for Miss Winter.  He ascended to his room, to change his coat and
looked at his watch.  It was nine o'clock, and at ten minutes past
nine, Margery returned with her shawl over her head.

She was flushed and panting.

"I've had such a run in the snow," he heard her say to Avis.

And the girl answered:

"Father's home."

She came to him then, at the table, sharpening the carving knife on
the steel before he cut a piece of cold pork.

"My, Jacob!  Back to supper?  Nothing's amiss?  I've been to Shipley
with a bowl of nice stock for Miss Winter.  She don't pick up.  It's
her age against her."

He did not answer, and Margery took her place at the bottom of the
table.  Her husband preserved silence, nor did he reply to Barton
Gill, when the old man spoke.

The children lowered their voices and looked sideways at him.
Margery, who had come straight home and not returned in to the
Shipley house-place, was ignorant that he had been there and left the
oranges upon the table.  She, too, fell very quiet and knew that she
had gravely angered him by going to the Winters.  She doubted not
that he had set another trap for her; and this time he would think
that he had caught her.  She was not frightened but sorry.  She had
her emotion, however, ignored Jacob and talked to the others.  Then,
the meal ended, Bullstone left the kitchen and ascended to the little
room in the upper floor, where he kept his papers and books.  He did
not reappear until Avis, Auna and Peter had gone to bed.  Gill, who
slept over the kennels, had already retired.  Then he came back into
the kitchen to get a day book.

"Wait, wait, Jacob," begged Margery.  "Do, my dear man, keep your
anger for me and not frighten the children with it.  Auna's gone
crying to bed and the others are cowed and full of fear.  It's too
bad.  What have I done, after all?  Visited a sick old woman with a
basin of jelly.  Is that enough to----?"

"No more," he said slowly.  "I know what you've done--what you've
done often enough before.  It's ended now.  All's over between us and
I'm not going to talk; I'm going to act.  And may the Almighty in
Heaven strike me dumb where I stand, if you shall ever hear my voice
again after this hour.  I could kill you and I could kill him--I
could have killed you together just now.  But there's others to think
about.  My children are mine, so I believe."

"What are you saying?" she cried.

"You've heard my voice for the last time," he answered and left her.

He locked the front door; then he went up to his workroom and the
place was silent.  Only the house crickets chirruped and the fire
rustled.  Margery sat for an hour looking straight before her.  What
did he suppose had happened?  What was he going to do?  What could he
do?  Something awful had overtaken him; some evil things had come to
his ears.  It was impossible that her trivial act behind his back
could have awakened passion so deep as this.  She had not hidden the
visit to Shipley.  The children knew where she had gone and might
have told him if she had not.  His awful threats terrified her.  He
had said all was over between them and that she should never hear his
voice again.  He had accused her of adultery and declared that he
might have killed her.  She was very frightened now and feared for
his reason.  She blamed herself bitterly for going to Shipley and
vowed never to err again.  In this mood she persisted for some time,
then it passed and she banished the fear that he was mad and grew
angry at his insufferable insults.  She pictured life without him,
and without the eternal threat that sulked in his eyes.  Then she
considered her children and his.  She flamed with fierce indignation
at his allusion to them.  'My children are mine, so I believe.'  And
he had sworn before God that these should be the last words he would
ever speak to her.  But from anger she quickly returned to terror.
He must be mad thus to attack her, and she, no doubt, had innocently
helped to drive him mad.  Her soul sickened at the thought of the
long hours yet to pass before the morning.  She fell into tears and
abandoned herself to a frenzy of weeping.

He made no sign and presently she dried her face and determined to
approach him.  If he was mad, then it became her to treat him as a
sick man, forget her own suffering and do all in her power to soothe
his temper.  It was past twelve o 'clock when she went upstairs and
saw a light under the door of his little room.  She nerved herself to
enter and turned the handle of the door; but it was locked.

She spoke low--not to wake the children who slept close at hand:

"Jacob--forgive me.  I'm cruel sorry.  Hear me--only hear me--there's
a dear."

And he, sitting writing within, listened to the last three coaxing
words as though they had been red-hot stabs through his head.  For
they were an echo.

He did not reply, and a hideous fear touched Margery that he might
have destroyed himself--that that was his meaning, when he said she
should never hear his voice again.

"For Christ's sake, Jacob----"

But there came no response and she went down again to the kitchen.
The iron of the stove was giving fitful sounds that told of cooling;
the fire had sunk.  She looked out, to see that the snow had ceased
to fall and stars shone through thin clouds.  The crickets had left
off chirruping and night hung dead and heavy.  She huddled up in
front of the fire and her terror increased.  Then that happened to
lessen it.  She heard her husband push back his chair and move.

Once more, an hour later, she ascended, knocked at his door and spoke
to him; but he did not reply.

"May I be judged by my fellow-creatures and condemned if I have ever
done you wrong in word or thought or deed, Jacob," she said at last.
Still he made no answer and she went downstairs again.  He had heard
and reflected how soon that would happen she professed to desire.
Her fellow-creatures should judge between them quickly enough.

At two o'clock she put out the lamp, lighted a candle and went to her
bedroom.  She crept up very quietly, so that he should not hear her;
but listened again at his door.  He was breathing heavily and
muttering in his dreams.  She had heard his voice again; but it
sounded strange and far off, touched to an unfamiliar tone, as
sleeping voices are.

She put out her candle and looked in upon her children.  Avis and
Auna were both in deep slumber.  They had pulled up their blind, as
they were wont to do and put out a saucer of milk and jam, to freeze
and make a dainty for the morning.  Peter's room was on the other
side of the passage.  He, too, slept soundly with a book beside him.
She entered her own room shivering with the cold and feeling
physically hungry.  But she did not descend again.  She went to bed
and shivered still, missing the great, sanguine body that was wont to
keep her slight figure warm.

Again she cried till her pillow was wet and cold, and she longed that
when she slept she might never wake again.

Dawn was grey and the hour for rising had come before she grew
unconscious.




CHAPTER XIV

END OF A HOME

That night, while Margery had sat below and from time to time strove
to reach him, Jacob Bullstone occupied many hours with writing.  He
had set down the web of testimony woven over many years--the long
horror of suspicion, now culminated in proof irrefragable.  Scene by
scene, incident by incident, his remorseless memory gathered every
thread of the pitiful fabric.  It seemed that a stage was lighted
within his brain, whereon act succeeded after act of his married
life.  It did not surprise him that the narrative presented itself in
such orderly sequence, for all had long been printed upon the pages
of his mind, and, looking back, one fact alone astonished him: that
he should have patiently endured his dishonour until the final
climax.  From his own standpoint, the account, as he set it down,
appeared lucid and trustworthy.  A stranger, reading it without bias
or other knowledge, had been convinced of its reality.  By a thousand
touches truth seemed to stand confessed.  That another story as good,
in contravention of Bullstone's statement, could be created out of
the same material he did not imagine.  Jacob wrote quite calmly, only
holding his pen when his wife came, to break the silence with
entreaty.  Then after she had gone he proceeded, and not until the
work was done did nature demand rest.  He fell asleep, indeed, a few
moments after he had ceased to write.  The compilation acted like an
anodyne; the mechanical work of setting all down calmed him; and at
the finish he lay back in his chair and slumbered heavily.

At dawn he awoke, and about the hour when Margery began to sleep, he
rose, made a packet of his papers, put on his coat and boots and went
downstairs.  It was too early to pursue his purpose, but he would not
loiter and, as the maid appeared to open the house and light the
fire, Jacob set out for Brent, leaving no message behind him.  Not
much snow had fallen and the sky was white and clear.

He began to collect his thoughts and found that they persistently ran
on into the future, after what he now planned to do should be done.
He was busy thus when an incident brought him back to the present and
loosened passion.

Adam Winter was astir, sweeping the snow away from his outer gate.
He saw Bullstone, flung down his broom and came out to intercept him.

His smiling face sent the blood through the other's head and Jacob
trembled with rage as the smaller man came to him.

"Got to thank you for thicky, brave fruit last night I expect.  Like
you to leave it and----"

The other roared:

"It's over--it's done, you God damned scoundrel--all's done--all's
known!"

Adam stared, and then a heavy fist smashed into his face and Jacob's
other hand was swung to the side of his head.

He reeled; his hat flew off; half blind and groping, with his arms
thrust before him, he fell.  He lifted himself to his knees, but
dropped again, giddy and scarcely conscious.  He supposed that he
confronted a madman, for there existed no shadow of meaning to him in
this assault.  He had once or twice seen his brother suffer from like
paroxysms.

"Man, man, that's bad," he said gently, with one hand to his head,
the other supporting him.  "That's a wicked thing to do, master, and
you'll be sorry for it."

Bullstone was gone.  His fury sped him on his way, and not until he
had breasted a hill did he slow down and his mind grow calmer.  For
some time he rejoiced at what he had done; then he began to be sorry
for it.  Often enough he had been tempted to physical violence
against Winter; once or twice he had felt a gathering lust to do
violence to Margery; but he had escaped the peril until this moment.
Now ill chance had thrust his enemy upon him at an hour when
self-control was impossible.  As the sun rose he mourned his act, not
for itself, but because it was a mean thing to smite a man just
recovered from sickness--a blot on the large, inexorable plan now
waiting accomplishment.  He had succumbed to Nature, after
successfully fighting her for so long.  That any fellow-creature
would blame him--that any husband would have thought the worse of him
for killing Winter with his hands--he did not for a moment imagine;
but his act stood out of harmony with the long story of his patience
and restraint.  It was beneath his character and reputation.  He
remembered an ancestor who had taken the law into his own hands and
destroyed both the man and wife who dishonoured him.  That was a deed
orbicular, complete and tremendous; but he dreamed of no such course.
He had sunk from his own high standards and regretted it.

Then he dismissed Winter and returned again to all that was going to
happen when the Law had freed him.  He meant to divorce his wife and
begin a new existence; but he did not mean that the end of his days
should be ruined and his destiny changed by tribulation forced upon
him from without.  He held himself guiltless and stainless.  He was
only one of many honest men who had been called to endure like
indignity and disaster; but the sympathy of mankind would lie with
him; and his own steadfast nature and large patience might be counted
to gather up the ravelled texture of his life and carry on the old
design in a manner worthy of him and his family.

So he argued and, keeping those who had wronged him out of his
thoughts, reflected upon his children.  They must not suffer for the
loss of a wicked mother.  Nor did he fear it.  They were old enough
to understand and would appreciate the situation.  John Henry was
already established on land presently to be his own.  Peter would
stay at Red House and gradually assume command; for Red House and the
business some day must fall to his portion.  Avis would marry in a
year or two and go to Owley Farm.  There remained Auna, and for Auna
he felt no fear.  She was his own, his nearest and dearest--all that
he would soon have left.  She would never leave him until the breath
was out of his body.  The future stretched stark and clean.  He must
suffer, and he began to realise how deeply; but the intermittent
pangs of the future would not corrode and sear as the torment of the
past.  He knew that he might struggle back to peace, given the time
to do it, for with self-respect all things are possible, and he felt
that he had already regained that.

He dwelt on details.  When she was free of him, the other man would
doubtless take her.  Whither would he take her?  They could not live
at Shipley in sound of his voice.  The excuses to stop at Shipley
would not hold now.  The woman would see to that and remove herself
beyond reach, both of him and her own outraged family.  He thought of
Judith and Barlow Huxam and imagined their dismay.


And meantime, with the snow-blink on one side of their faces and the
firelight on the other, Margery and her children sat at breakfast.
She had heard from Barton Gill that Jacob was not in the kennels, and
after putting off the questions of Avis and Peter for a time,
something seemed to break in her heart.  A sense of destruction
mastered her and she began to cry.  Her reserve and the caution,
practised a thousand times to disarm the children's questions when
Jacob would not speak, deserted her.  She was indifferent and could
no longer pretend anything after the events of the previous night.
She was also physically exhausted and had no wits longer to parry the
youthful attack.  She told them that their father was very angry with
her and had said that he never meant to speak to her again.  And then
she succumbed and wept helplessly before them.

Avis was awed and Peter angry.

"I hate father--I hate him!" he cried.  "He's a bad man, and this
isn't the first time he's made you miserable."

"John Henry will protect you, mother," said Avis.  "And I'll hate
father too, if he's cruel to you.  And so will grandmother Huxam."

Auna put her arms round her mother's neck.

"Forgive him," she said.  "You always make it up with us when we are
naughty.  Perhaps you was naughty, or said something he didn't
understand."

"It's him says things we don't understand," declared Peter, "and
mother's never naughty, and you ought to be ashamed to say it, Auna."

"We're often naughty without knowing it, Peter," explained Auna.

"Well, and if we are, how can we know we're naughty when nobody tells
us?" asked Avis.  "Father won't speak to mother, and how can you make
it up if a person won't speak to you?"

"You can speak to them," said Auna.

Her mother was in the broken-spirited state when an adult will talk
with children as equals.

"I did speak to him, Auna," she said.  "I prayed him to listen and
tell me what I'd done.  But I'm never to hear him speak again."

"Then more won't I," declared Peter.  "God's my judge, mother, if
father don't say he's sorry for being such a beast, I'll run away
from him."

"And so will I," added Avis.  "And if I was you, I'd run away too,
mother.  Then where would he be?"

Auna, terrified at these words, crept out of the room and ran away to
hide her own tears.  Then Margery dried her eyes and controlled
herself.

"Don't you pay no heed to the silly things I've said--either of you.
It'll come right.  And I won't have no hard words against father.  A
better father and a kinder and more generous, no children ever had.
So never let me hear you say one word against him, for that I
couldn't bear.  He'll come home all right I expect; and don't let him
see nothing but smiles when he does.  And both forget I was such a
silly mother as to cry about nothing.  Where's Auna?  I've frightened
the child.  Now you be off to the kennels, both of you, and sweep the
snow away, and let's all be ashamed of ourselves."

Thus she sought to undo the mischief of her weakness, and partially
succeeded; but her own moods swept her like a cross-sea, and when the
interminable hours of the morning had passed, when noon came, and
dinner time, and still Jacob did not return, she began to lose her
nerve again.

She yearned for her mother, and the longing grew until at last,
unable to endure more, she dressed for walking and slipped out of Red
House unknown to the children.  At every turn of the way to Brent she
expected to meet Jacob; but he did not appear.  He was coming back by
Lydia Bridge and reached his home an hour after Margery had left it.
He guessed that she had gone not to return, and was glad.  He had
spent the morning with his lawyer, a man older than himself, who
expressed deep concern at hearing his opinions and prayed for
patience and delay.  Mr. Dawes had worked for Jacob's father before
him and felt staggered by this most unexpected disaster.  He read the
record while Jacob sat and waited; then he argued for time, for
reconsideration and explanations--at worst a separation for the
family's sake.  But he spoke to deaf ears and Jacob presently
explained that he was there to direct and not receive advice.  The
lawyer's talk appeared worse than vain from his standpoint, for all
was already accomplished and only the details remained.  His evidence
assured the sequel.  The incredulity of Mr. Dawes made Bullstone
impatient and the lawyer's lamentations he nipped in the bud.  He
left explicit directions to institute proceedings for divorce against
his wife and cited Adam Winter as co-respondent.  Once more Mr. Dawes
protested at the absurdity of the situation.  Against Adam no whisper
had ever been heard.  He enjoyed a reputation for plain-dealing and
stood well among the Chosen Few.

But Jacob declined argument.

"I'm here to issue orders," he said, "and you're here to carry them
out.  If you won't, I can put my business into other hands."

Thus it was left and the solicitor, deeply concerned for both
parties, read and re-read Jacob's statement, yet felt the issue to be
in the highest degree doubtful.  He could barely believe the truth of
Bullstone's claims and he suspected that the other parties might well
deny them and fight him.  He perceived the horror of such a
situation, and determined at any cost to change his client's mind, if
it were possible to do so.  He decided for the moment to brave
Bullstone's anger and do nothing at all.  He would at least give the
man time to grow calm and consider the gravity of his intentions.  As
yet Jacob was far from calm; he stood too near the evidence of his
own senses, and Mr. Dawes perceived that he was beyond reason for the
moment.  He left it and only hoped that Bullstone would not throw
down his challenge, and so drive his wife from him for ever.

But this climax was reached before the end of that day.

At dusk Mr. and Mrs. Huxam drove up to Red House in a cab, asked to
see Jacob and were shown into the parlour.  They did not bring
Margery, but came for an explanation of her husband's conduct.

Jacob was in the kennels when they arrived and quickly joined them.
He brought in a lamp with him and set it on the table.

Barlow Huxam spoke as soon as the door was shut.

"Our daughter came to us this afternoon in a very poor way," he said.
"It seems that last night you swore before her face never to let her
hear your voice again.  You kept your word to-day and went to Brent
this morning and didn't return.  She waited until far beyond forenoon
and then came to us.  If you can explain this in a manner to satisfy
me and my wife, I'll be glad, because on the face of it, it looks as
if you'd took leave of your senses, Jacob."

"I've taken leave of my honour, that's all," answered Bullstone.  "Or
it would be truer to say that my honour has been stolen from me by my
wife.  You understand what I mean no doubt.  I've got proof positive
and shall act accordingly.  I'm sorry for you too."

"Good God!  You stand there and dare to say and think that Margery's
not faithful to you?"

"Saying and thinking matter nothing now.  I've said too little,
Barlow Huxam, and I've thought too much.  Now I know--I know.  It's
in my lawyer's hands--Mr. Dawes--and you'll hear from him, if you're
going to stand for your daughter."

"Let's be clear," answered Huxam, who was now very angry.  "Let's get
to the bottom of this, before we see you for the last time I hope.
What shall we hear from Mr. Dawes?"

"You'll hear that I'm going to divorce my wife for her
adulteries--that's what you'll hear."

"You dare to stand there before me and tell that damnable lie.
Margery!  Margery!  And you've lived with her for near twenty years
and can think it!  What filth are you made of?  What poisonous,
beastly stuff has got into you?  Her--the clean, pure thing--with
nought but honest blood in her veins and honest thoughts in her mind!
Her--adultery--you're a madman!"

"You'd better go," answered Bullstone quietly.  "If she doesn't own
it, so much the worse.  There's no defence for either of them.  I'm
not mad, though my Maker knows I've endured enough to make me.  I
want to hear nothing about her--or him.  I want to be free, and I
mean to be free."

Then Judith Huxam spoke.  She had been sitting motionless while her
husband walked up and down the room.  She had turned very pale, when
Jacob stated his determination, and she had put her hand up to her
breast and kept it there.  She was quite collected and showed no
emotion.

"And who is the man, Jacob Bullstone?" she asked.

"Adam Winter is her paramour."

"That godly, steadfast creature!"

Barlow spoke and bade his wife rise and accompany him.

"We'll be gone.  This must be answered by others than us," he said.

But Mrs. Huxam did not move.  A strange expression was in her face.
She looked coldly and curiously at Jacob.  Then a faint flush
lightened her pallor.

"The mills of God grind slow but exceeding sure," she said.  "I
understand; I know what's happened now, and you'll know presently.
Eighteen and more years ago I came into this room for the first time,
and I saw a sight that shook me to the roots of my being.  I saw that
you'd flung another book to lie on the Bible.  Looking back, I've
often wondered why I didn't stop your marriage with our daughter on
that.  But the Lord chose that things should go on; and they went on.
And He was looking ahead to this; and, in His mercy, He showed me
yesterday that nothing better than this could have happened.  He
showed me yesterday, when you spoke blasphemies in my ears, that it
was time Margery left you if she was to save her soul.  So I'm not
surprised at what you've told me to-night.  This is all God's plan.
He chooses strange tools to do His work, as you said yesterday, and
He's chose you yourself and no other, to part you from your wife.
You understand that, don't you?  It ain't Adam Winter, or any other
man, that's come between you and the mother of your children.  It's
yourself--led to it by an outraged God.  You are one of the doomed
and always was, as I've known too well these many days, though,
Christian like, I hoped and prayed for you.  But the Lord knew, and
He's took our child from the evil to come and--hear this--He'll take
your children from the evil to come also.  There must be offences,
Jacob Bullstone, but woe--woe to them that bring them!  Our child
shall hear your voice no more as you have sworn; and neither shall
you hear her voice, nor see her again, nor yet her shadow.  If you'd
been a saint till now, this piece of work would have damned you, and
henceforth you'll go the scorn of every self-respecting woman and the
hate of every man.  And you'll call on the hills to cover you, but
they won't."

She got up and looked at her husband.

"Now we can go," she said.

"And understand this," added Barlow, whose voice, even in passion,
sounded genial and mellow contrasted with his wife's--"Mind this, you
dirty dog, if I spend every farthing I have on earth, and have got to
borrow more on my knees from my neighbours, I'll fight you to the
end, till my daughter's righted in the face of the nation.  And when
that's done, may God help you, for there won't be any other party to
do it.  And Winter will say the same."

Jacob was unshaken.

"The spoken word remains," he answered, "and the long story
remains--every item--stamped in my brain for eternity.  They may lie;
but justice is justice.  No power on earth can undo what's done, or
leave it doubtful."

"You speak true," said Mrs. Huxam.  "God Almighty will see to that.
There'll be no shadow of doubt on earth, or in hell, or heaven, when
this is blazed to the light."

They went out to drive away.  Snow had begun to fall again and the
full force of a blizzard was reserved for this night.

"Best tell your driver to go by the lower road," said Jacob calmly,
as he stood and saw them depart.  "There'll be drifts already on the
other way."




BOOK II



CHAPTER I

CHORUS

Within a month of his wife's departure, Jacob Bullstone began to
perceive the full significance of the thing that he had done.

He learned that his petition would be opposed and he received from
Barlow Huxam a cheque, being the present market value of the land on
which the postmaster's house was in course of erection.  And time had
opened his eyes to other issues, for he found that the sympathy he
anticipated was not forthcoming.  Acquaintances evaded him, and when
he expected his few friends to express regret at his misfortunes,
they did not.  Indeed all were anxious to avoid the subject on such
occasions as they were unable to avoid him.  From a brief, unnatural
quest of fellow-creatures, therefore, and an inner impulse, to seek a
spirit of support, Jacob soon turned back into himself, since no such
spirit appeared.  Time dragged and he grew more and more restless on
discovering the body of public opinion ranged against him.

One thing he had done, two days after the outrage that demanded it.
He had first written to Adam Winter expressing his regret for his
violence; and he had then torn up the letter and gone to see the
master of Shipley in person.

He learned that Samuel Winter was ill and Adam on the land.  Their
aunt spoke to him, and if looks could have done him evil, Jacob must
have suffered.  She answered his questions with the fewest words
possible, then shut the door in his face.

Jacob sought Winter, found him presently, walked up to him and spoke.

"I only want to say this: that I'm sorry I struck you.  I was three
parts mad at the time.  But I did a wrong thing to assault you and
I'm prepared to suffer my penalty in that matter."

Adam was not at work.  He walked on the sheltered side of a hedge,
with his hands in his pockets, and now he looked curiously at the
other.

"Do such a trifle as that trouble you?" he asked.  "Well, I've heard
you.  Now you'd better go.  There's nothing to be said between us
till I answer you afore the law."

"Are you wise to deny it and bring me to the proofs?"

The other cut him short.

"Go," he said, and Jacob turned away.

He puzzled not a little to understand why his wife's family were
prepared to defend the case, and supposed that they must honestly
believe their daughter to be wronged.  He explained this on the
assumption that appearances set against the likelihood of such an
offence, and they knew not that the final evidence was in his own
possession.  He had conversations with his lawyer and found Mr. Dawes
not in the least helpful.  The old man had obeyed him with extreme
reluctance; but he did not pretend to be in sympathy with his client,
and the fact that both Jacob's wife and Adam Winter were prepared to
oppose the appeal and deny the offence went far to make Mr. Dawes
still less sanguine.  He tried again and again to change Bullstone's
mind and failed; but his attitude served to create increased
bewilderment in the other.  Indeed Jacob puzzled to see how isolated
he had become.  The fact made him still more determined and still
more distrustful of everybody but himself.  He resented such lack of
understanding and was impelled by it to trumpery emotions, ridiculous
in the light of his present huge affliction.  They persisted,
however, and his wounded pride drove him forward with increasing
obstinacy to fight to the end, that his wrongs might be proved and
his justification appear.  There awoke a desire to confound those who
now set flowing the tides of criticism against him.  They came as a
new thing, contrary to experience, for he had always understood that
the betrayed husband might count upon the support of most
serious-minded people.  At home there was no pity for him save in one
quarter.  The children came and went from their grandparents, and he
had expected that they might bring messages; but they never did.  Not
a syllable ever reached him from his wife, or from the Huxams.
Indeed his own boy and elder girl were restive and taciturn under
this terrible situation.  Once Avis reported that Margery was ill,
and Peter openly corrected her for mentioning her mother at Red
House.  Only Auna continued trustful, but she missed her mother and
was very downcast and silent.  She, too, went to see Margery; but
even she had nothing to say on returning home.

Once Jacob asked Auna if her mother were at the post-office; but the
girl only looked frightened and shook her head.  Whereupon he soothed
her.

"Don't take on, Auna.  Trust me.  The others can't, but you
understand me best.  You must trust me as much as you love me.
Mother and I have got to part, because she has done what I can't
forgive.  Indeed she wouldn't come back any more if she could.  She
won't want to do that.  But I hope you'll stop with me, because I
don't see how we could ever live without each other.  But you must
all decide that for yourselves when I've been to London."

It was a strange speech to Auna's ear, yet she felt no doubt.  To
live away from her mother seemed a terrible thought, but life away
from her father must be impossible.  She told herself that she would
sooner be dead than live without him, and she assured him of the
fact; whereupon he warned her.

"Always think that whatever may happen," he said.  "There will be
people who will tell you that I am the wicked one; but everybody will
know differently before very long.  For God forbid that I should tell
anything but the truth, Auna; and the truth is enough.  And many hate
me and speak evil against me, and I know Avis and Peter believe it,
and John Henry believes it, else he'd have been over to see me before
now.  But you mustn't believe it.  You mustn't let anything come
between us, Auna."

Already with proleptic instinct he sought to tighten the bonds
between the child and himself; already he felt that a time might
quickly come when, of all his family, she alone would be left.  But
only a passing mood prompted him to this scene with the girl.  Again
and again, while time dragged intolerably and he smarted under
consciousness of the people's aversion, he calmed himself with
assurance that time would soon vindicate and justify.  Then those who
now lacked pity for his plight, or anger against his wrongs, would be
the first to come forward and acknowledge their errors.

One supporter he had--of a sort who rather embarrassed him than not.
Yet the new kennel-man, George Middleweek, was staunch enough, and
having gleaned particulars of the situation, though not from
Bullstone, resolutely upheld Jacob.

Middleweek succeeded Barton Gill, who had now finally withdrawn from
Red House to live in a cottage half a mile distant, and since the
new-comer's character was clouded by past intemperance, he
entertained a lively regard for Jacob, when he took him on trial
against so grave a fault.  But Mr. Middleweek understood dogs and
promised to be valuable.  He swore by his new master from the first
and also won Peter's regard.

He was a widower of fifty, and he had the wit to take something of
Jacob's measure after a month at Red House.  Then he ventured on a
friendly word or two and feared that he had been unwise, since Jacob
took no notice at the time; but, later on, George perceived that his
goodwill had been acceptable.

A week before all interested parties would be called to London,
Bullstone visited William Marydrew, though a shadow now existed
between them.  For even William proved no whole-hearted friend in
Jacob's opinion, and he had been astonished to find that the old man
terribly doubted.

William declared the tragedy a personal one; he felt for both parties
and was aged by a misfortune so unexpected.

"I thought nobody would question that I was right," said Jacob, "and
yet such is the regard in most people for the woman over the man that
even you----"

"But you can't well understand, from your own-self point, how this
looks to the world at large, including me," explained William.  "It's
come on all the nation like a bolt from the blue, because no thought
of such a fatal thing ever fouled the air.  The dirtiest tongue would
not have dared to whisper it.  'Tis beyond belief and experience of
the parties; and what seems the gathered knowledge of many days to
you, falls on our ears like a clap of thunder.  And so you can't
expect folk to side with you as a matter of course, Jacob.  On the
contrary, 'tis the last thing you might have expected with such a
record for fine living and clean behaviour as your wife has.  And the
last straw was when we heard that she and Adam Winter deny and defy
you and he going to stand up for their good names.  The common people
don't know much, but where human nature's the matter, they be quite
as clever as the scholars, and often a damn sight cleverer; because
the poor are up against human nature all the time and life teaches
them the truth about it; whereas the other kind miss it, owing to
book larning being so mighty different.  And hearing that Adam and
Mrs. Bullstone are going to fight you, the people take their side;
because well they know they wouldn't stand up before a judge and jury
if their cause weren't good.  No--they'd cut and run, as you expected
to see 'em."

"The people argue without knowledge of the facts," answered Jacob;
"but you, who have heard the facts from me in secret and know whereon
my case stands--how you can still hold the balance against me, for
all our long friendship--that puzzles me, William."

"I'm a truthful man where my memory will let me be," answered Mr.
Marydrew, "and so I won't pretend anything.  Words have as many
meanings as a songbird have notes, Jacob, and the ear be often
bluffed into believing things by the mind that is hungry to believe
'em.  Against the words, which sounded to your ear as if them two was
in each other's arms, you've got to balance what's mightier than
words.  That's deeds and the conduct of a lifetime, and principles
that have never been doubted.  Winter's life all men know.  He's
religious in a true sense, and though I've got no use for the Chosen
Few, no more than you have, yet you can't deny that there's never
been one of 'em catched out in a crooked deed."

"It's that canting, stiff-necked sort who always are caught soon or
late," answered Jacob, "and I'll say this, William: I believe that if
my late wife had had her way, she'd have been much too clever to take
this line.  She knows the damnable truth in her heart, and she's been
driven into denying it by her parents--not for her own sake, but
their credit.  She never told them the truth of course.  And if she
had, seeing there are no witnesses that I can call, they'd deny it."

But Billy shook his head.

"Mrs. Huxam wouldn't have made her husband fight for a lie.  She
believes that her daughter is a wronged woman, and she'll be true to
her rooted faith, that this has happened for good by the will of God.
Of course I don't believe that everything that happens is to the good
myself, but Judith Huxam holds to that opinion, and she's saying that
what you've done puts you down and out for eternity, while it opens
the door to your wife's salvation, which you were making doubtful.
You'll find that this dreadful job won't shake her in her opinion,
that God's behind all; and the upshot won't shake you in your
opinion, that God have nothing to do with our disasters--beyond
building us in a pattern that's bound to breed 'em.

"You and me agree that the evil that matters to us comes from
within--so there you are.  And the pity is that the evil we breed
can't stop with us, but must pour over for other people; and that
again shows it isn't only the evil we breed from within matters,
because we be all called upon to suffer, more or less, from the evil
that others breed.  In fact 'tis a very pitiful come-along-of-it
every way and I wish to God I'd gone to my rest afore it happened."

Thus William discoursed; but he did not depress his hearer.  Jacob
Bullstone could only wonder at the blindness of his neighbours.  He
wasted no more time in resenting it.  He only pressed forward to the
hour when all would justify him and grant that he was not deceived.

Billy changed the subject, though that was difficult to do.  During
these tumultuous days he dreaded the appearance of Bullstone and
sometimes even made shift to avoid him.  For, like many others, he
was deeply sensible of his friend's approaching downfall and, unlike
many others, who now hated Jacob, he--a lifelong friend--mourned for
the future and feared the shape that it must take with such a man.

"How's your new hand, George Middleweek?" he asked.  "He's a chap as
knows his own mind--faulty though it is."

"A success.  I like him, because he is sane and understanding.  After
Barton Gill he's a comfort.  He has character and a pretty good
knowledge of life.  And he won't fall over the drink again.  I've let
him into my feelings a bit--not about my troubles, but my opinions in
general.  He's a widower and doesn't trust religious people, nor yet
women."

William laughed at this description.

"So much the more time to give to the dogs.  I've often known them as
was devoted to dogs didn't like women.  Yet, though they be oftener
compared to cats, I've known a good few dog-like women also.  Not so
much dog-like towards men, but dog-like to duty and religion and
children and so on.  My daughter, Mercy, was such a woman.  Duty and
religion were one with her.  In fact duty was her religion and she
made it a very good working faith.  For what more can you ask of
religion than to keep you out of mischief and to make you live in
honesty and charity with your neighbours?  That's reality; but a lot
of religion is not.  I knew a saint of God once, and she was on all
accounts the most objectionable woman I ever did know--made the very
thought of Heaven chilly.  A bleak, holy woman, as never did a wrong
thing, or thought a wrong thought, and yet left the bulk of her
neighbours in a beastly temper after she'd been along with them five
minutes.  How she did it nobody could understand.  The very parson
she sat under gave her a miss when he could."

"Women have wronged men far oftener than men have wronged them," said
Bullstone and William sighed doubtfully.

"There's less understanding between the men and women than there
was," he answered.  "Education drives 'em apart instead of draws 'em
together.  The women be getting so famous clever that they see a lot
about us that used to be hidden from 'em, and we don't bulk so grand
in their eyes as we did.  They have a deal hidden in 'em that's been
waiting to come out; and now it's beginning to do so.  It was always
there, mind you, but hid under ignorance, and I say us men haven't
half known our luck all these years."

Jacob listened.

"They're changing for the worse," he said.

"They are trying out the stuff hid in 'em," repeated William.  "Woman
be God A'mighty's last creation, Jacob, and no doubt He worked into
'em pretty near everything He'd got left over.  Us never will
understand all there is to 'em, and only a fool thinks he can."

"I was such a fool."

"Don't drag yourself in.  Keep your mind open.  That's what I pray
you to do.  You've appealed to the Law and you must abide by the Law.
And if it holds that you are mistook; then----"  He broke off and
took the younger man's hand.

"I'm your friend, be it as it may," he said.

Jacob nodded, shook the ancient hand and went his way without words.

For a moment he considered William's broken sentence, but could not
see what might have finished it.

Indeed Mr. Marydrew himself felt the fatuity of any ultimate thought
or hope at this crisis.

With very genuine grief in his eyes he watched Bullstone depart.

"Broke on the wheel of the world, because he weren't turned true," he
said to himself.  "But which of us be?  Which of us be?  Not one."




CHAPTER II

VERDICT

Spring had conquered the river valleys and was climbing to hilltop
again.  Those old pack-horse tracks, where bygone generations of
beast and man have gradually beaten the ways down and down, until
they run lower than the fields and the woods about them--those deep,
heat-holding Devonshire lanes were dowered with green once more and
lush with young leaves and fronds.  At their feet opened wood sanicle
and dewy moschatel; crowning them the bluebells wove their purple and
scattered their fragrance; beside rill and water-trough golden
saxifrages shone, and the wood strawberry was in blossom with the
violet.

Amelia, after noon on the day that followed Adam Winter's return from
London, put on her sunbonnet and taking a man's walking-stick, which
she had always used since her illness, crossed Shipley Bridge, passed
over the green space beyond and presently reached the home of Mr.
Marydrew.  She knocked and he came to the door.

"Morning, Billy," she said.  "I thought you'd like to know how it
went.  Adam got back last night and just catched a train after the
verdict was given.  T 'others come home to-day--so he believes."

"I needn't ax you for the verdict.  I see it in your face," he
answered.  "But come in and tell me, what you've heard."

She sat by his kitchen fire presently and tapped the ground with her
stick to drive home the points.  He listened without comment.

"'Tis a triumph for the Chosen Few against the ways of darkness,"
declared Amelia, "and it went very much indeed as you said it would;
and we won't talk about him, nor yet the proper wreck and ruin he's
made of himself, because we shan't agree about that.  But this is
what happened.  He said what his beastly thoughts made him believe
was the truth; and his wife and my nephew told what was the real
truth; and then his great weapon against them broke his own head.  He
gave out certain words, that he swore he'd heard Margery and Adam use
in Adam's own bedroom by night.  He'd heard Margery say, 'Quick,
quick--there's a dear'; and he'd heard Adam say, 'Come, then--come.'
And Margery had laughed."

Mr. Marydrew nodded.

"That was his tower of strength; but I always warned him he might
have heard wrong, and that if they denied it there was only his word
against theirs."

"They didn't deny it," answered Miss Winter.  "Like the truthful
creatures that they are, they admitted every syllable--and why not?
For how were them words said do you suppose?  The truth was this.
Poor Samuel had been struck down by the illness just after Adam
recovered.  Margery had brought some nice food for me, and Adam had
axed her to come upstairs and coax Samuel to take his medicine, which
he refused to do.  It was in Samuel's room and to Sammy himself,
while she offered him his physic in a wine-glass, that Margery said,
'Quick, quick--there's a dear'; and it was to Samuel that Adam said,
'Come, then--come.'  And then Samuel had bolted his physic and
Margery had laughed at the face he pulled.  And when they heard that
explanation, the jurymen believed it.  They had long got restive and
weary of the whole piece of nonsense, and now they said they were
satisfied, and Adam says that anybody could have seen, even before
the jury spoke, that the judge was also terrible tired of it.  The
great judge summed up on the evidence that Bullstone brought forward,
and that his wife and Adam explained, and he talked mighty straight
to the petitioner--that's Jacob Bullstone--and told him that he'd let
vain imaginings get hold on his mind and allowed his jealousy to
poison his vision and his sense of justice and honour to his wife and
to the co-respondent--that's my nephew.  He said that in his opinion
it was a dreadful thing that good money and good time should have
been wasted over an obstinate and mistaken man's error.  Then he
talked to the jury, and presently the jury went out.  But in three
minutes by the clock they was back in court and dismissed the
petition with costs, and all his fabric of lies and flimsy fancies
was down in the dust.  And that means Bullstone can't get no divorce,
and Margery and Adam come out of it without a shadow upon 'em, and
her hateful husband have got to pay the lawyers every penny and all
the expenses.  Because the judge agreed with the verdict, and went so
far as to say that there were no grounds whatever for the suit, and
that it should never have been brought.  In a word right has
triumphed, and I shall always think a lot more respectful of the Law
than I have in the past."

"Costs follow the verdict, of course," answered Billy, after
considering this matter in silence.  "And what else follows it?  We
shall see as to that.  Time must pass.  A good flight of time be the
only thing for all parties, Amelia."

"Time can do a lot," she said, "but it can't undo what's done; and if
you think----"

"Let time pass," he repeated.  "Only time will heal the sores."

"You needn't talk like that," said the old woman.  "Adam haven't got
no sores, except natural sorrow for an ill-used woman.  For himself,
nought can gall one like him.  He's above the people's blame or
praise, for when a man goes into a law court, and gets mauled by a
paid lawyer, whose business be to show him in the wrong; and when he
comes out of it with only the respect of his fellow-creatures, and
never a stain on his life and history--then you may reckon he's a bit
out of the common.  And she was white as death in court and fainted
once.  And my nephew's terrible sorry for the woman, and sorry for
himself, too, because he says he can never have any more to do with
her.  It's a natural instinct in him that they must be nought to each
other after this; and I doubt not Margery will feel the same.  Their
lives can never touch in friendship no more, William."

"Very like they would both feel so," admitted Billy.  "And what does
Adam say about Jacob Bullstone?"

"He won't name him, and when Samuel cursed him and threatened great
blows against him, Adam bade his brother be careful to do no evil.
All he said was that Bullstone would suffer last and suffer longest."

"A very true saying, and your nephew be the wisest of all concerned,"
declared the old man.  "For Adam this came as the greatest shock,
because it burst upon him more unexpected and terrible than on the
woman even.  She knew her husband's weakness and, for brave pride,
hid it from all eyes, including Adam's.  And he will agree with me
that 'time' is the only word."

"In your opinion it may be," answered Amelia; "but in the opinion of
the Chosen Few, I reckon 'eternity' will be the only word.  And don't
you think, or dream, or tell Adam, or this fool, Bullstone, or
anybody else, that time be going to soften it, because there's plenty
of righteous people about as will take very good care that time does
no such thing."

"That's what I'm afraid of," admitted Billy; "but don't you be one of
them, my dear.  If us would only let time, like patience, do her
perfect work, wounds might often heal that never do; but no doubt a
lot of godly folk won't be content to stand by and leave this pair in
the hands of God."

"What God wills must happen," answered Amelia, "but you may bet your
life, William, He won't will to bring them two together again; and
nobody but a vain thinker and a man weak in faith would hope such a
horror.  However, you can very well leave Margery to her Maker and
her mother; and as to her husband, if he was a man, he'd hang
himself."

"Don't you be angry," urged Mr. Marydrew.  "Your nephew have come out
as he went in, without a shadow upon him.  For the rest, don't you
cast a stone.  That ain't like you.  Let charity conquer."

"You're his side we all know," answered Miss Winter; "and I'll give
you a warning for yours.  Don't let your sense of justice go down
afore the wicked man.  He'll gnash his teeth no doubt and wring his
hands; but don't you try to come between him and his punishment,
Billy, because you can't."

"True.  I can't," he replied.  "If you knew Bullstone like what I do,
you'd have no fear he was going to escape anything."

Then Amelia astonished him by a penetration for which he had not
given her credit.  Her intuition may have sprung from anger--a
fruitful source of bitter truth--but it threw a light upon what might
presently happen, and William was not prepared, though much inclined,
to contradict.

"You say that.  But a woman always knows one side of men better than
any man can, and old maid though I may be, I'll tell you this.
Bullstone ain't the sort to lie in the dirt for his sins and scrape
himself with potsherds.  Don't you think that.  He'll snatch at hope,
like the drowning at a straw.  He'll look at it all from his own
point of view, as usual, and fifty to one he'll fool himself there's
a way out.  Yes--he won't see himself as all clean and honest men see
him, William.  He'll only see that his wife's a pure woman and that
he was mistook to think her a whore.  And what then?  Have he got the
decency to pour ashes on his head for shame, and slink away from the
sight and sound of men?  Not him!  He'll say Margery's worthy of him,
after all, and that he must have her home again.  He'll expect
presently to find her forgive him like the Christian she is, and it
will be his fixed dream and hope to win her back at any cost--till he
wakes from the dream and the hope dies.  And not till then will his
true punishment begin.  That's Jacob Bullstone, and that's the man
his wife knows, and we know, and you'll live to know.  Far ways off
what you pictured--eh?"

The ancient doubted.

"What you say about a woman knowing a side of man's mind that other
men do not, be very likely true," he answered.  "But I trust you will
live to see yourself mistook in this matter.  It's a great thought
and you may be right; but if that happened, along with it would go a
lot more that's in the man, which I know and no woman does.  I can
only say again, let time take charge, and I wish nobody else but time
was going to have a hand in it."

While they talked, Adam Winter wandered, unseeing, among his sheep on
the hill with his hands in his pockets and a sense of anticlimax in
his soul.  The excitement was ended.  He had seen himself justified
and cleared; he had seen an innocent woman pitied; and he had seen
Bullstone confounded.  Now he was in the midst of sweet things and
breathing fresh air with the heights rolling before his eyes and the
larks aloft.  But no exhilaration, only a sense of sickness and
misery hung over him.  He, too, longed for the time to pass, that the
sordid memories of the trial might grow fainter.

Elsewhere Jacob Bullstone travelled from London and sat wrapped in
his thoughts.  But they were no covering for him.  They fled past in
wild rags and tatters, as the steam across the train window; and he
could not frame a consistent argument, or follow any line of
reasoning.  All was chaotic, confused, hurtling, and every thought
lashed like a whip.  He struggled against the rush of ideas as a man
against a blinding storm.  He could clutch at nothing for support; or
perceive any steadfast glimpse through this welter of what the future
held in store.  He was too astonished to suffer much as yet, save
unconsciously, as an animal suffers.  The reality, as it had
developed in a law court, took a form so utterly unlike that which he
had accepted as reality, that simple amazement reigned in him for a
long time.  It supported him in a sense through the trial and, now,
as he came home, it gradually gave place to bewilderment, which, in
its turn, quieted down until the stormy waters of his mind grew
sufficiently smooth to offer a reflection of the situation newly
created, and he began to trace the picture of the future.

He was trying to appreciate this evasive vision and find some firm,
mental rock for his own feet when he got home again.  But as yet
nothing clearly emerged, and as often as he clutched at a
steadfast-seeming point from which to start thinking, the image broke
up under the storm swell which still swept through his mind.  He felt
as one in the presence of death.  He desired to know, now that this
earthquake had fallen upon him and his, who were left alive.  He felt
himself to be first among the dead, and believed, until much later,
that existence could only be a living death henceforward.

Then he tramped after noon through the lanes, carrying his bag and
sweating under the black clothes he wore.  He pursued the familiar
way, walked, ridden, driven a thousand times from boyhood to manhood,
and he found an empty, peaceful spot in his brain that could see the
bluebells and mark the breaking riot of the green.  This
consciousness of spring served to revive an element which had
persisted with him during the past destruction and denunciation of
the Divorce Court.  He had listened humbly to the appalling errors
the Law declared him to have committed, and he had viewed without
passion the naked picture of his mistaken suspicions--each displayed
and each destroyed by truth in turn.  He felt no rage at this
juncture--only the gathering surprise that finally overwhelmed him
for a time, to the exclusion of more vital emotion.  But, as the
judge spoke, he felt great, vital wounds inflicted one after the
other on his soul, yet endured them without flinching.  Still the
shame and condemnation were less than the astonishment, that his
convictions should be but a phantom dance of falsity coloured to look
like truth by his own sick mind.

The farther view and deeper estimate had to come.  He was not near
reaching them yet, nor had he developed anything like the attitude
that Amelia Winter prophesied; but his brain now began to tune for a
new outlook.  The answer that he must make to the destruction of all
his intentions and decisions was not so far propounded.  He still
loitered in thought with himself, but as he approached the valley in
which his life had been passed, its tenderness and joyful, vernal
spirit unconsciously influenced him, distracting his mind away from
himself--not to the unconscious phenomena around him--but to the
supreme and solemn figure in the fantasy now at an end.  He thought
of his wife.  Whereupon a new phase opened in his mental processes
and he began to regard with naked eyes the edifice of the past.
Dwelling now upon the trial, he asked himself whether he still
persisted in his former convictions, or whether the united and
independent judgment of his fellow-men had proved their falsehood.
That he could even propose this question calmly was a fact sufficient
to indicate the answer.  No such possibility would have entered his
mind, had he not been prepared to weigh it and ultimately accept it.
Yet he hesitated for the present to tell himself that he was
convinced; for that admission meant such stultification of self, such
absolute abnegation and retraction, such penitence, contrition and
atonement, that he doubted his power to attain to them.  Only did it
seem possible to do so by keeping Margery and her sufferings in the
forefront of his mind; and that was not practicable until he decided
whether he would accept the decisions uttered against him, admit the
justice of the world's rebuke and proceed to create a new life on the
ground blasted, but also cleansed, by these fires.

Before he reached William Marydrew's house he began to plan the
future, as though he had the planning and need but indicate his
purpose to see life fall in with it!

Abased indeed he must stand; but his particular sort of pride was not
going to suffer eternally before a confession of error.  So he told
himself and already half believed that the opinion of his fellow-men
would weigh little against the possibility of reconciliation.  In
that case all future life should be devoted on his part to atoning
for the awful wrongs he had put upon her; and the censure of others,
at worst, must be thistledown to the stinging hail of his own
self-condemnation.

He saw all existence to be narrowed to this one ambition, and so
swiftly and inconsequently was his broken intelligence now moving,
that he had already swept the past away and pressed on to the future
and the tasks that there awaited him.  Through these immense changes
his mind sped among the bluebells; then he walked in sight of the man
and woman talking at William's cottage door, and Amelia hastily
departed.

"There he cometh!" she said.  "Pounding over the ground--boring along
like a bull--the hateful creature.  And now he can bore into the
earth and bide there; for there won't be the face of a decent man,
woman, or child to welcome him no more."

"Yes, there will," replied Billy.  "A man there is, if I'm still
worth to be called one, and a child there is, while his youngest
remains.  Soften your heart, Amelia, for surely the conquerors can
afford to forgive."

She went off and in a few minutes Bullstone reached Mr. Marydrew.  He
was full of his own thoughts and present ambitions; but he felt the
necessity to retrace the ground and, even in his present excitation,
could remember that he had reached a point which William could not
possibly understand until he had been informed of some of the stages
that had served to lift Jacob from the depths to the situation he now
occupied.

He came in, thankfully accepted the offer of a cup of tea and spoke
while William prepared it.

He had already reached the conclusion that he must confess absolute
error without excuse.  For a moment he had considered the justice of
such a complete surrender, by arguing that the play of circumstances
were to a large extent responsible for his mistakes and their
culmination; but he felt, before the tremendous conclusion, that any
attempt to extenuate would be peddling and even dangerous.  There was
truth in the fact that time and chance had played his nature cruel
tricks and it might be that others, after hearing the complete
admission he designed, would think of these things and advance some
few counters on his behalf; but he would not do it himself; he would
not take refuge under any sort of justification, or seek to modify
the awful thing he had accomplished.  Thus the strange spectacle of a
man almost cheerful in his destruction appeared to William, and he
perceived at once the impatience with which Jacob recounted the
details, and the anxiety under which he laboured, to get the past
behind him as swiftly as possible and face the future.  He was not
crushed by what had happened, because he was already clinging, heart
and soul, to what might happen.  Horror of the thing done no longer
dominated him, for interest and concentration upon the things yet to
be done.

Thus he came to his ancient friend in a mood beyond Billy's
imagination, and as he talked volubly and proceeded from past facts
to future hopes, Mr. Marydrew perceived that an angry, old woman, in
some mysterious fashion, had known better than himself how these
disasters would react upon this man.  For Jacob was concerned with
his conclusion, not the stages that had led to it.  Already he was
forgetting them as though they had not existed.

"I knew I was doomed long before the end," said Bullstone.  "I saw it
in their faces, and I'm a reasonable man, William, and can sit here
now and tell you that I wasn't obstinate and stiff-necked about it.
Before the judge talked to me and told me the truth--the blessed
truth, William, not the bitter truth.  'Blessed' I say, because it
opens the door of the future and doesn't close it for all time.
Before the judge poured his scalding words upon me, I knew they were
deserved.  And knowing them deserved, they hurt different from what
he meant them to.  That's the spirit that began to move the moment
after my first enormous astonishment to find I was wrong.  And the
highest moment--the moment that threw all my years of agony to
confusion--was when she and him were able to show the words I heard
at Shipley were innocent and had to do with Samuel.  From that point
the tide turned--and I saw all I'd done, and looked back at a
lunatic.  And you see me now only hungering for the days and nights
to speed past, so that the madness that have overtook me may be
sunk--sunk and forgotten in the light of the sanity that's
coming--that's come.  For I'm here in my right mind, William."

"Don't run on too fast, however, Jacob," warned the elder.  "I'm very
thankful you can accept the truth, because, thank God, that leaves
the door open, as you say.  But you must remember that there's a lot
more goes to this than for you to say you're sorry about it.  You
must use your good sense and your new-found wits to see how it all
looked and still looks to the injured parties."

It seemed that Bullstone was doomed ever to move in the atmosphere of
the unreal.  Unreal grief and imaginary disasters had ruined his
life; and now he sought to rebuild the wreck by his own achievements,
independently of the actual course of affairs, which must depend upon
others.  His hopes might well prove as illusory as his vanished
fears.  The man's mind was always in extremes.

Billy's warning cooled Bullstone.

"I know--I know," he answered.  "I'm assuming nothing.  My whole life
will be a long atonement to her--to lift myself from where I have
sunk, till I'm worthy to be forgiven.  I see that.  I ask none to
pardon till they can.  How soon they can depends on me.  I'm dealing
with better people than myself; so is it too much to hope, even in
this awful pass of my life, with destruction and grief around me,
that I may rise myself up to be forgiven by them?"

"Not too much to hope; but a darned sight too much to happen--for a
very long while, my dear," explained Mr. Marydrew.  "You've done a
most fearful deed and those that have suffered from it must be given
a deuce of a lot of time before they can calm down and see how it all
fell out--how the Devil knew your character was prone to jealousy and
fooled you according.  The first person for you to consider is your
wife, and if you can once rub it into her, fully and frankly, that
you be sure you'd done her an awful wrong and be set, while life's in
your body, to atone for it, then--presently--when she gets away from
the influence of her wonderful mother--perhaps.--For Margery knows
the good side of you as none else does, and she's slow to anger and
quick to forgive.  You've got to lay the foundation of the new life,
and I hope to God, my dear, you'll soon find it grow; but the shape
it takes will depend a good deal on other folk so well as yourself."

"I must proclaim my wickedness and paint it so black, that the mercy
of man will intervene and lessen my blame of myself, if only for the
credit of human nature," said Bullstone.

"Man won't be much put about.  'Tis the mercy of woman be going to be
most use to you," answered Billy.  "You must court that.  After all,
jealousy be a left-handed compliment to them; and they can always
forgive that without much trouble--up to a point.  Of course you went
far beyond that point, however, because the Devil got in you, and
turned your eyes crooked, and made life look like a nightmare, same
as it do if you see yourself in a spoon.  You'll want the patience of
Job to endure the next six months or so; but other men have come
through and why not you?"

"I know that human nature don't forgive such cruelty as mine very
easy.  Awful cruel I have been--I, that thought I was made of mercy,
William.  So life surprises us--so we shock ourselves quite as much
as we shock our neighbours.  But I keep saying, 'Time's not ended:
there's still time.'"

They talked for an hour, then Jacob returned home, to find Avis and
Peter.  They welcomed him awkwardly, as though he had been a
stranger; but that had been their attitude to him of late.  Auna had
waited for him outside and brought him home.  They had kissed but
said little as yet.  He spoke to his son and elder daughter that
night after supper, when George Middleweek, the new kennel-man, had
departed and Auna was gone to bed.  He owned his errors frankly, as
though he were a repentant child confessing to grown-up people.  He
told them of the evil that he had done, and how he prayed God and man
to pardon him.  With the microscopic vision of youth, they looked at
their father while he spoke.  They observed he was very haggard, that
he had not shaved and that one of his eyes was shot with blood.
"You're old enough to understand," he said.  "I've done a very
mistaken, terrible thing and wronged your dear mother as never a
good, noble woman was wronged before.  There aren't words to say how
wicked I've been--nor yet how sorry I am.  You must all be patient
with me, Peter, and try to forgive me if you can."

They looked at him silent and round-eyed.  His appeal embarrassed
them and they knew not what to say to him.

"Mother's won, then?" asked Avis, screwing up her courage to the
question.

"By the blessing of God she has, Avis."

Uneasily conscious that a man ought not so to speak to his children,
they stole away presently, and then breathed again.

There was no pity in them.  They only gloried in their father's
defeat, as they knew that others would.

"It's knocked the stuffing out of him," said Peter.

"So it has.  I hope mother's all right," answered his sister.

"You bet she's all right: she's won.  And grandmother and grandfather
and Mr. Winter's all right too," promised Peter.
