"It's all very wretched and I'm sick of the subject, and I wish it
could be dropped," said his son; "and it's a thousand pities that you
can't go farther off from Brent, or else mother can't be took away
out of it.  There's a talk of her going to Uncle Lawrence, and it
would be a blessing if she did, for she's growing to a thread-paper
and getting as weak as a rabbit.  Of course you can't go, I suppose;
but she might, and they ought to take her."

"Your mother's thin?  So Auna says.  It's a great grief to me."

"No business of mine anyway.  But you must look after yourself
nowadays, for there's nobody else to trouble about you, and I think
I've a right to ask a few things, father."

"Certainly.  Ask what you please, John Henry."

"Very well then.  And first I'm very glad you've made such a good
recovery, and I'd have come sooner but for the mountains of work.  I
hope you won't take it amiss, or think I'm pushing, or anything like
that; but, with you, none of us ever know exactly where we're
standing, because you do such unexpected things.  I've always been a
good son, I believe--quite so good a son as Avis is daughter, anyhow;
and you've given her Owley, so I feel it's only fair, me being your
eldest son, if I ask for Bullstone."

"Owley's my wedding gift to Avis.  She's going to be married and
going to live at Owley as you know; therefore it was a very good time
to let her have it.  You're not of age."

"I soon shall be; and the eldest ought to have Bullstone."

"Why in such a hurry?  I haven't gone yet.  Plenty of time."

"You let Avis have Owley."

"Fight against your mean greed," answered his father.  "Even your
grandmother won't approve lust for this world's goods.  Go on with
your work, learn your business and trust me for the future.  Remember
that I've got to think of others besides you.  I've taken over
Huntingdon for myself, because a time will come some day, when I'm
old, that I may decree to live there--for the air and peace.  And
then, no doubt, you'll have Bullstone, and Peter will own the
business at Red House.  But there's Auna too.  And I'm not past work
yet."

"If you could give me a written, signed promise for Bullstone, I'd
know where I stood."

"Give--give--give!  And are you never to give?  Are my children to
receive always and return nothing--no duty, no love, no respect even?
Have you ever thought what you owe to those who brought you into the
world?"

"I owe no man any thing," answered John Henry without emotion.  "And
I never will.  It's always the fashion, seemingly, for parents to
make a fuss about what their children ought to do, and expect them to
fall down and worship them.  Why should I--just because you married
and had a good time with mother?  And, seeing what life is, I don't
know that anybody need feel under any very great gratitude for being
alive.  It was all in the day's work that I was born; you didn't
choose me, and a child don't owe a parent any thanks whatever for
coming into the world.  And so far as the rest is concerned, you've
done your duty by me, and I've done my duty faithfully by you, and
everybody.  I've never given any trouble--never got into a
scrape--always been straight and hard-working.  And I deserve
Bullstone and ought to have it."

"What does your mother say?"

"She's understood that the eldest son had it.  But I can't talk of
her to you, of course."

"Why not?"

"I'm mother's side, and God knows I wouldn't do nothing against her,"
he answered.  "But this has nothing to do with her."

"How so, if all mine is hers?"

"She wouldn't take anything of yours, father, and never will.  You
talk as if nought had happened.  You seem to forget.  But you can't
expect none of us to forget, while we see her every week.  It's been
a fearful thing--cruel for your children and everybody.  It will
never be forgot by mortal man I should think, and you can't expect
any of us to be exactly the same again.  We're honest and we've got
our feelings and we've been through a lot.  I'm sure you owe us
something.  And if you're not going to let me have Bullstone, you
ought not to let Peter have the business.  I'm your eldest son
and----"

"Learn what your mother thinks and come to me again," directed his
father.  "All I have is hers, and it was always her wish, when first
Avis got engaged, that she should take Owley for her portion.  If
she'd like for you to have Bullstone while I live, it can be.  After
your mother's self, there's only Auna to think about."

John Henry cheered up and promised to do as he was directed.

"I'm properly certain mother would say I ought to have it," he
declared.

"I expect she would, and her word's my law.  You'll be of age in less
than a year, so things may happen as you would wish.  But I don't
transfer till the present lease has run out.  It wouldn't do for you
to own the farm on which you're being taught your business."

"I know my business.  I know full as much as Bob Elvin, if not more.
I've got larger ideas than him."

"I dare say you have; and now you'd best be gone.  And you can see me
again when you've heard your mother."

John Henry departed and Jacob considered him.  In the past he had
much resented similar applications on smaller subjects: the young man
never lost anything for the sake of asking; but now this large
request left him unmoved.  He meant to leave Bullstone to his son,
and had no real objection to handing it over in his own lifetime.
For the moment this incident offered hopes of a message from his
wife.  There might chance some thread in John Henry's demands to
serve for the business of drawing Margery and himself together again.
He was ever on the look-out for such threads.




CHAPTER IX

JACOB COMES HOME

The mother of Margery believed, with Augustin, that persecution is
the only solicitude the virtuous have any right to show a sinner.
She held that where the least doubt of salvation might still be said
to lie, it was better to torment than ignore, since this form of
attention will sometimes torture the wrong-doer into grief for his
wickedness, and so open the door to repentance and salvation.  But
she was not often in such doubt and generally separated the goats
from the potential sheep without difficulty.  The doomed she did not
ever persecute, since any attention paid to those patently condemned
was not only useless to them, but implied danger to the agent.

Of such, without the pale, was Jacob Bullstone, and now a situation
had been reached where one thing must certainly have happened, save
for the attitude of Judith Huxam towards him.  Even despite her it
might yet occur and the issue still stood in hope; but success
implied that Margery would first actively oppose her mother, and her
power to do so lessened fast.

The double accident of Jacob's broken thigh and his wife's
indisposition delayed a possible union, and now the next step to any
such event depended upon Margery.  By letting her husband know that
she desired to return, she might have shifted the responsibility on
to his shoulders, and so ensured the achievement; but she was still
anxious that he should not know, since she feared the violent steps
that he might take to bring them together.  Moreover she desired to
be able to say afterwards to her parents that she went of her own
free will back to Red House, and that her husband had no hand in the
action.

Thus precious days passed, and while Jacob gradually regained his
strength, thought upon his daughter's wedding and hoped the event
might be the beginning of a slow and patient re-winning of his wife,
she was in reality won.  Long years seemed already to drag between
Margery and her home; while in her failing health, the life with her
parents grew more and more distasteful and afflicting.  She was
conscious of the change in her physical circumstances--more conscious
of it than her father, or mother; but she still believed that a
return to Red House would restore her strength.  A situation, simple
in itself, was thus complicated.  The man and wife wanted to come
together--because each, in a solitary heart, felt that only so was
life longer to be desired at all.  An instinct of self-preservation
called upon Margery to return and she felt that, otherwise, her
fading life forces might not be much longer preserved.  It was not
desire for Jacob himself, but hunger for the healthy environment of
home, that fortified her to get back to it.  She had forgiven her
cruel ignominies and now regarded them as she regarded her an√¶mia--as
a sickness for which evil fortune had to be blamed.  Jacob similarly
had suffered from a dreadful sickness, and now he was cured.  Thus
nothing but religion stood between them to Margery's mind.  She could
pity Jacob in some moods, and see nothing wrong in her desire to
return to him; while, in others, she still doubted, so far as he was
concerned, but did not doubt for herself.  Then the conviction
increased that she must go back to Red House if she were ever to
recover, and when she heard, through Auna and her own brother, that
Jacob actually desired her to return, the last doubt vanished.

Bullstone's attitude resembled hers in intense desire; but he was
ignorant of her dangerous health and postulated a gradual ordeal--an
ordeal mercifully to end in her complete forgiveness and her
subsequent return.  Peace might yet await them; but he was now broken
into a patience he had not known, a patience willing to leave the
future in his wife's hands.  But there stood between them and any
such consummation the figure of Margery's mother, assured that her
daughter's husband was lost; that he was a man who could represent
nothing but danger to the community of the faithful--a man condemned
to the consequences of his unequalled sin--one who, since wickedness
is both contagious and infectious, must be avoided absolutely.  To
approach such a man or seek communion with him was to challenge a
pestilence; and when, therefore, Judith had heard her child, in a
mood of melting, say that a wife's place was beside her sick husband,
she took alarm and girded herself to repel the danger.

Indeed, Margery became her chief care; she neglected lesser
obligations and she devoted much time to planning her child's
welfare.  Upon the news of Bullstone's accident, she had hoped he
would not recover and, for a time, suspected that Providence had
chosen this way to put Margery out of danger.  But now Jacob was well
again and about to return home; Avis clamoured for her delayed
nuptials, and Margery held that she might, on such an occasion, be
present, both in church, and afterwards, at Red House, if only for a
little while.

Her mother firmly withstood the suggestion, and by her strenuous
opposition convinced Jacob's wife of one thing: that only through the
road of secret flight would she ever return to her husband's home.
She knew now that Judith held it a choice between heaven and hell;
she realised that if she returned to Jacob, her parents would regard
her as eternally lost.  The thought had shaken her at first, but she
found, on examining it, that her attitude to religion was modified
before reality.  None had influenced her to this, for those whom she
met were of her mother's opinion, and opportunity did not offer to
learn the views of other people; but life and its present crying
needs began to change her outlook.  She contrasted the things she had
been called to suffer and the unspeakable torments shed upon her
husband out of his own weakness, with the established convention of a
loving, sleepless and watchful God, who desires mercy better than
sacrifice, and is all powerful to establish that happiness on earth
the craving for which He implants in His creatures.

She was no longer concerned for her soul, while her personal griefs
served to show her mother's convictions in a new light.  Thus, as her
hold on existence grew more frail, she recoiled with increased
revulsion from the dogmas of the Chosen Few.  Mrs. Huxam had defeated
her own object, as religious mothers are apt to do, and by drowning
the wounded Margery in the billows of a melancholy and merciless
faith, was indirectly responsible for creating a new vision, wherein
failing nature still offered Margery some measure of promise.  The
very escape in spirit comforted her and she was more cheerful for a
time; but she did not get stronger, save mentally, and her license of
mind alarmed Mrs. Huxam, who read these symptoms in her own light.
She felt that her daughter's unrest and doubt were the visible sign
of an inward temptation, wholly to be expected at this crucial
juncture in her affairs; and while obeying the doctor in matters of
food and medicine, Judith believed that the vital encounter must be
fought on other ground.

She was not as yet frightened for her child's life, but only
concerned for her soul.  She determined, once for all, that Margery
should not go to the wedding of Avis.  She now tried to wrest this
matter away from Jacob, and even considered whether the ceremony
might be arranged and hastened, while he was in hospital; but Barlow
Huxam would not support her in this.  He pointed out that to take
such a step, which was possible enough, seeing that Avis and young
Elvin were amenable to Judith, would be unwise and likely to create a
measure of sympathy with Bullstone.  For the postmaster had as yet by
no means bated in his bitterness; he did not desire any weakening of
public sentiment against his son-in-law.  That such a weakening
existed already caused him some astonishment; but his attitude
promised presently to respond to a stimulus that would not have
touched Judith, for a measure of humanity, from which Mrs. Huxam's
sterner outlook escaped, leavened Barlow's opinions.

Thus at the crucial moment it stood, and then a first step was taken.
On a day in November, Jacob Bullstone came home, and Avis and Auna
and Peter met his carriage at the outer gates of Red House.

All, for different reasons, were glad that he should be back again,
and Auna chronicled each little incident of his return, hoping that
opportunity would occur to tell her mother about it.  She hid her
young heart, which throbbed painfully to see her father so lame.  But
he told them that was a smaller matter, which would mend yet, and, at
worst, not prevent him from presently riding again.

Peter did not rest until his father had been to the kennels, where
Jacob was glad to be.  He gave his son praise, admired two new
litters of puppies and spoke with George Middleweek.  George had
matter for entertainment, or so it seemed to himself.

"Old Barton Gill was poking about here yesterday week," he said.  "He
told me he expected to find everything wrong and that he wasn't
disappointed.  He thought the puppies were a terrible poor lot and
better in the river than out of it; and he said the kennels didn't
look so smart, by a very long way, as in his time.  He took a very
grave view of everything, and at last he reached a point when I said
that, old though he was, I should feel called to break his neck if
ever I catched him here again."

"He's a ghost from the past, George," answered the master.

"Yes; and there's a few things less useful to busy men than ghosts
from the past--especially weak and silly souls like Gill," answered
Mr. Middleweek.  "He's a ghost easily laid, however, and I don't
reckon he'll be back along in a hurry.  'Tis amazing how silly the
wisdom of most old men looks, even in the light of middle-aged
knowledge."

"The times move so fast," explained Jacob, "and the wisdom of the
fathers is the foolishness of the children.  In fact there's only one
high fashion of wisdom, if you come to be an old man, George; and
that is to keep your mouth shut all the time."

"There's some old fools you can forgive," declared the kennel-man,
"but not old fools that bleat the past.  Who has got time or patience
for them?"

Then, as the evening shut down, Jacob came into tea and found that
Auna and Avis had arranged a feast for him.

Now it was the turn of Avis and she led the conversation to her
marriage.

"I do hope you'll see your way to it pretty soon, father," she said,
and he promised her that the wedding was going to be his first care.

"Pray God your mother will be well enough to come," he hoped boldly;
and Auna echoed his wish, but Avis doubted.

"I'm sure she wouldn't like Bob and me to wait any more, even though
she's not very well.  And I don't much think she would come, even if
she could," explained Jacob's daughter.  "Of course there's no
getting away from the past, and granny would be a good bit put about
if mother was to want to come to Red House after."

"Grandfather's rather wishful for mother to be at the church,
however," said Auna, "for he told me so."

"And I'm sure Avis would wish that, too, and Bob also," declared her
father.  He had rather dreaded home-coming, but the ordeal proved
pleasanter than he expected.  Two men called together during the
evening and Billy Marydrew, with Adam Winter, dropped in, that they
might congratulate Jacob on his recovery.

Avis and Peter went about their own affairs, but Auna sat beside her
father until he bade her leave them.

"I made this here man come in with me," explained William.  "He
weren't coming, but I said he'd be welcome for two reasons--firstly
to wish you a friendly wish, which was in him to do, and secondly to
see me home, because the night be blowing up for foul and I'm so
light as a leaf nowadays; and if the wind thrust me in the river,
there I should certainly bide."

They shook hands and Winter spoke.

"You know how much I've felt about this.  It was a very terrible
thing to fall out and----"

"Don't go back to it.  Don't let it trouble you any more.  How is the
man?  Does he understand that it was a bad thing to do?  Does he
understand that he and I have both been out of our minds and done bad
things?  Or he may argue, perhaps, that he was right to take the law
into his own hands.  Anyway what he did to me was a great deal less
than what I did to you.  I know--I know, Adam.  It's one of the few
blessings left that time can let me talk in this stark fashion to
you.  Where there's such forgiveness as yours to me, there's a great
foundation for friendship.  Humble enough on my side.  But it would
be well to know if Samuel has took your line in that matter and
harbours no malice, or if I must be on my guard."

"He's long since forgotten all about it.  He remembers no more than
my bull remembers.  He'll wonder to see you lame and treat you
respectful, same as he did before."

"That's good then.  There's compensations for a weak mind if it
carries a weak memory, Adam.  And yet, without memory, we can't mourn
our sins and better our behaviour."

"That's why the beasts that perish don't get any forwarder, Jacob,"
explained William.  "Memory be left out of them, save in small
particulars.  And so they just live, and their sorrow is a passing
matter and their happiness not much more than a sense of comfort.
And Sammy's terrible lucky in one thing, like all other lunies, that,
though he pays the price of his wits in this world, he's a dead
certainty for salvation in the next.  You may be born without a mind,
you see, but if you're a human, you can't be born without a soul; and
though this world's blank for Samuel, in any high sense, his number's
up for the Kingdom of Heaven, since he's so sinless as a jackdaw, for
all his mischief."

"A deep subject," admitted Adam, "and I don't know as ever I looked
at it like that, Billy; but comforting for certain to them that care
for the soft, unfinished ones."

"Oh, yes," promised Mr. Marydrew cheerfully, "our maniacs will all be
there to welcome us; and in the light that pours out of the Throne,
my dears, 'tis very likely indeed we shall find that the softies were
often a damn sight saner than some of us, who prided ourselves on our
wits."

"That's true for certain," said Jacob.  "I can confess before such as
you, though to some sort of men I never shall.  But I can tell you
that I've been mad and am sane again--sane enough, at any rate, never
to trust my sanity any more.  I was a very proud man, William, but
pride has left me.  I shall never be proud again, nor proud of
anything that belongs to me."

"You never were that," answered Winter.  "In fact, where you had the
right to be proud, you were not, Bullstone."

They talked together, and Auna, who had been sent away soon after
their arrival, now returned and poured drink for them.  Jacob felt no
objection to saying things before her that he would not have said
before his other children.

"It is a good thing in my life to know that you can sit in this room
as a friend," he said to Adam Winter.  "There's a sort of sorrow that
is not all pain; and though I shall never look upon you without
sorrow, I shall always welcome the sight of you."

"I understand.  And may the welcome never grow less and the sorrow
dwindle," answered the other.  "We've gone through a deep place; and
I've lived to gather from you that you were possessed, as many good
men have had the ill luck to be; and please God others, that matter a
very great deal more than I do, may live to understand the same."

Thus, upon his home-coming, there fell a fitful ray of peace into the
outer regions of Bullstone's mind; and, content for a brief hour to
live in the present and trust this Indian summer, he took heart for a
little while.

He thanked them for their visit and declared, presently, that his
physical wounds had been a good thing.

"To go short on your leg is a trifle, if it helps you to go longer in
your heart, and take wider views and rise up into patience," he said.
"I'm the wickedest of men, and yet I have got good friends who are
wishful for my betterment.  And I never shall forget it--never."

"You're not a wicked man, father.  Tell him he's not a wicked man,
Mr. Marydrew," urged Auna.

"Nobody's very wicked, my dear," answered Billy; "and nobody's any
too good.  We're all much of a muchness, and good and evil be like
the berries on the trees---all stomachable to somebody.  Good's bad
and bad's good according to the point of view, and only through being
bad, some folks reach to being good.  To some nice people being good
is as easy as falling off a log--same as it is to you, Auna, because
you can't be any other; and to some equally nice sort of people, 'tis
a lot more difficult.  The point ain't so much whether you be good,
as what you be good for.  Some folk be so good as gold, and yet good
for nought; and some are so wicked as the devil, and yet good for a
lot.  In fact 'tis a very wonderful world, my dear."

Auna laughed and presently the men rose to go home.  Adam promised to
send Samuel to see Jacob on the following day.  Margery had not been
named, but William alluded to her as he departed.

"There's always hope," he said.  "I'll come along to-morrow and eat
my dinner with you, and us'll have a tell.  And don't you get too
busy.  You'll be a sick man yet, and your maiden here must look after
you so well as she can."

Auna promised to do so, and when Avis and Peter had eaten their
suppers and gone to bed, she waited on her father.

"I do all the things you do," she told him.  "I lock up and put out
the lamps and everything, because Avis is too busy with her wedding,
and Peter don't remember little things."

She helped him to his own room presently and he found it prepared for
him in every particular.  Then she aided him to undress, and he bade
her return, when she was ready to go to bed, and say good night.  She
came, in her grey flannel night-gown, and jumped in beside him for a
little while.

He was very silent now and very tired.  But he liked to listen to
her.  It seemed as though the years had rolled away and Margery,
young again, was lying beside him.  The very inflection of Auna's
voice was hers.

And while she talked, the girl was thinking of her mother, too, for
she knew what was in Jacob's mind.

"Go now," he said, for her presence became too poignant.  "Good
night, my dinky treasure, and God bless you."

She kissed him.

"And I hope--oh, how I hope mother will soon be here beside you,
father dear."

He squeezed her hand.

"Dout the candle and go on hoping--go on hoping, my pretty bird."

Then she slipped away and the man lay awake for many hours before the
circumstance of his home-coming.  Its goodness was precious; but the
loneliness and doubt tormented him.




CHAPTER X

FLIGHT

Margery fluctuated and on her feeblest days the desire to return home
became most intense.  For her own sake she longed to be back at Red
House; for his sake she wanted to be with Jacob.  Her emotions
towards him eluded her; but when she knew definitely from Auna that
his only dream on earth was to see her again beside him, pity woke a
faint ghost of the old love.  Red House itself drew her, for she felt
that if the remainder of her life was to be spent as a sick woman,
she could be a more useful one and a happier one in her home than
with her parents.  Though they assured her daily that their home was
hers, and dwelt much on the delight of the villa residence, soon to
receive them and Margery, she could win no pleasure from the thought
and her weakened mind shrank more and more from the robust opinions
of her mother and her father's forced cheerfulness.  They were
incapable of understanding all that she felt, and now indeed she
lacked physical courage to attempt further explanation.  In any case
she would be opposed.  Therefore, with plenty of leisure for thought,
she matured her secret plans.  They were foolish plans, for though
the idea of telling Auna frankly that she longed to come home and
leaving the rest to Jacob had more than once tempted her, this
obvious course she feared, as being likely to create greater
difficulties of ultimate reconciliation with her parents.  So she
gave neither Auna nor Avis any hint of the action proposed, but
arranged with Jeremy, on the understanding that no word concerning
his part in the plot should be whispered.  That assured, with ill
grace he promised to meet her on a night in November, one fortnight
before the day now fixed for the wedding.

Thus Margery planned her return home and hoped that the wedding of
Avis and Robert Elvin would serve its turn to distract attention and
smooth affairs afterwards.  In sanguine moments she even trusted time
to conciliate her parents.  That her father would some day forgive
her she knew, and that her mother must logically pardon in the
obedience to her own faith, she hoped.  For Margery fell back
whole-heartedly upon the belief that she was prompted and driven home
again at Heaven's command.  She found much consolation and support in
the belief that Providence willed her return.  For her, as for many,
faith was only fatality writ in a more comfortable word.

It had been arranged that at three o'clock on a certain morning,
Jeremy and his trap should wait near Lydia Bridge, and that his
sister should come by the pathway under forest trees, beside the
river and join him there.

Margery conserved her strength for this supreme effort and, for two
days before it came, lived in a trance.  But she was alert enough to
take more food than usual and preserve a cheerful attitude.  Her only
doubt centred in the extent of her physical strength, and now on the
eve of her departure, as that winter day closed in under a cold and
frosty sky, she wished, too late, that she had asked Jane to meet her
close at hand, and pilot her through the night to Jeremy.

She knew that she could safely leave the house, for her parents
always slept well and would not be awakened by any sound that she
might make.

She sat with them that night until they bade her go to bed.  Then her
mother ministered to her, read a chapter from the Bible, while
Margery drank her glass of hot milk, and so wished her good night and
left her.  The hour was ten o'clock and she knew that nearly five
hours must pass before she would start.  A little milk pudding was
always left beside her, to eat in the night if she awoke.  This she
determined to take at two o'clock, before she began to dress.  Now
the details, that seemed so simple at a distance, began to loom
larger and more complicated.  There was, after all, so much to do
before she could get clear of the house, and the subsequent walk
through the wood by the river began to seem a great thing.  For she,
who had once loved the night, felt nervous of it now.  Again and
again she wished that she had asked Jane to meet her near the
post-office.  She even considered the possibility of changing her
plans and fixing another night, before which this detail might be
arranged.  But Jeremy would be at Lydia Bridge by three o'clock, and
if she failed him, he could not be counted upon for a second attempt.

Her mind ran forward.  She would leave Jeremy at the outer gate of
Red House, while she,--about four o'clock, or earlier--would go
through the wood and knock at the door.  There was a bell, too; but
if she could rouse Jacob without wakening any other, that must be
best.  His room looked over the porch.  If she were strong enough,
she would throw small stones and waken him.

She pictured him looking out and seeing her.  He would certainly know
who it was by star-light and hasten to let her in.  The peat fire
never went out at this season, and he would bring her to it and draw
it up.  He would not say much.  He would be like a man fearful to
wake from a dream; but she would speak.  He must never know who had
brought her home: he would not be jealous about that, Indeed he could
not fail to guess.  After all it would be very like Jeremy to confess
in secret--for the sake of Jacob's applause and possible reward.  Her
husband would take her up to her room, then, and leave her to go to
sleep, while he dressed and began the day.  And presently her
children would come to see her, while the familiar sounds would be in
her ears--the song of the river, the bleating of the goats and the
barking of the dogs.  Puppies would tumble into her lap again--new
puppies that she had never seen; and old dogs she remembered would be
there to remember her.  She would be very still and rest all day; and
then painful things must happen, for Avis, or Peter, must go swiftly
in the morning to tell them at Brent and allay their alarm.  She
started out of this dream, for already she seemed lying in her own
bed at home.  But she was not there yet.  Thinking wearied her.  A
clock struck midnight.

She was back again in thought at Red House presently.  It seemed
already hastening to meet her, instead of withdrawing far away under
the stars and waiting for her to come to it.  Her mind wandered over
little homely things and indulged in little homely wonders.  How was
Jacob's linen?  Auna mended for him now.  And her own shards and
husks--Auna had told her that nothing of them was touched.  Jacob
never allowed anybody to go near the great wardrobe that he had
bought for her when they were married.  But her clothes had curiously
interested him.  She doubted not that he looked at the empty rags
sometimes and took care of them.  He had always treasured the russet
costume in which she was so nearly drowned before their marriage.
She concentrated upon Jacob and wondered why he wanted her, and what
he would think if he knew that she wanted him.  Another hour passed
and for a little while she slept, then woke frightened lest she had
slept too long.


Elsewhere a scene of unusual vivacity was taking place which bore
directly upon Margery's affairs; and while she reflected and dreamed,
her parents entered upon a lively argument ere they slumbered.
Barlow had taken his lozenge and was about to sleep when his wife
addressed him and touched a matter already much in his mind.

"I'm a long way short of comfortable about Margery," she began, and
he declared the same uneasiness.  That he should echo her doubt
interested Judith, but on questioning him she found that his fears
were not concerned with her daughter's soul.  Her bodily state it was
that agitated him.

"Dr. Briggs told me only to-day she was going back rather than
forward.  She wants a good shake-up in his opinion, and a very
serious thing is this: that she's not anxious to get well seemingly.
Doctor held that was a grave symptom, She's not set on building up
her strength, and she doubts if she'll ever do it, unless something
happens to throw her mind out of itself."

"Something will happen soon," said Mrs. Huxam.  "There'll be the
excitement of changing houses."

"It isn't that sort of excitement, Judy.  We're too apt to forget
that Margery was always a bit delicate.  After the awful shock, and
before she'd got over that, she was snatched away from her regular
life and thrown into ours, which is quite different in every way.
Quite right and necessary, but we can't realise all that meant, or
all she had to go through, I expect.  We only knew that she'd escaped
from the evil to come; but there was another side to her home life
which no doubt she's dreadfully missed and which we didn't know.  In
fact she's confessed it often.  And now she's got an√¶mia, and that's
dangerous in itself."

"I'm troubled about something a good bit more dangerous than an√¶mia,"
answered Judith.  "The dust we're made of only holds together as long
as our Maker wants to cage our souls on earth.  Then He cracks it and
lets the soul out; and that happens at the moment He wills and not a
moment sooner.  Margery is like a swallow in September--restless,
restless.  You can see it in her eyes--not resigned and not
interested in the villa residence, but thinking far too much of self.
The devil's at her, Barlow."

"It's nature--not the devil.  And you must put the body first for the
minute, because the state of the soul often depends upon it.  In a
word I'm not at all sure if Lawyer Dawes wasn't right.  He told me
flat out, that if he could make it happen, he'd get Margery and her
husband friends again; and he said that was more likely to improve
her health, and save her life even than anything that can overtake
her.  He's seen a good bit of Jacob Bullstone and he assures me he's
a changed man."

"And what did you say?  Reproved the vain fool I should hope.  'Save
her life!'  Doesn't Dawes know that 'He who loses his life for My
sake shall save it'?  Did you tell him that?  Did you remind him that
the only life that matters to a Christian is the eternal life?"

"I did not," confessed Barlow, "because, in the case of Lawyer Dawes,
that would have been vain conversation.  And I may remind you the
specialist that Dr. Briggs had down to see Margery from Plymouth said
something to the same purpose.  He's known for a very clever man
indeed, with many good and amazing cures to his credit, and he
understands his business be sure.  Briggs didn't agree with him I
grant, because he hates Bullstone for his crimes, and wouldn't have
her go back; but Dr. Nettleship, from Plymouth, did firmly hold that
if they could be brought together it might be the turning point for
Margery and restore her health and peace.  And, what's more, I
wouldn't be so very much astonished if Margery herself was agreeable."

Mrs. Huxam sat up wide awake.

"You properly shock me," she answered, "and I'm very sorry that I've
heard you utter these loose thoughts.  For they show a weakness that
I never guessed was so near home.  And now you say she's that way
inclined herself, and don't that show I'm right--that her spirit is
in danger?  It's too true that she's in moods sometimes, when she
thinks of that man in a very improper manner.  I've surprised her in
them, and we know Satan finds plenty of evil thought for idle minds.
But let it be understood once for all that they are evil and open the
way to deadly danger; and never let me hear you say again that it
might be well for her to go back to Red House; because if I do, I'll
change my lifelong feeling to you, Barlow."

"Don't say nothing you'll repent," begged Barlow, "You've taken this
in far too fierce a spirit.  We only want to consider all possible
plans for making Margery well in body first."

"We have not to consider anything of the sort," answered Judith.
"Her body matters not a brass button against her soul; and if, in her
bodily weakness, the devil sees an opportunity, then 'tis for us to
hinder him, not help him.  You're very near as bad as old Marydrew
and other people I've heard on the subject.  Don't you see what
becomes of your daughter's soul, if she goes back to that doomed
sinner even in thought?  You've astonished me a good bit by your
earthy blindness to-night, for I thought you were long past any such
weakness.  Sometimes my heart sinks when I look at life and see, even
among my nearest, such dangers opening under their feet.  But you--I
certainly did always count that you were safe."

Barlow in his turn was hurt.

"So did I," he said, "and with tolerable sound reason; and it's a
source of great pain to me that you can doubt it.  You mustn't
imagine, Judy, that I'm taking any fatal attitude.  I'm very well
satisfied that Margery can look after her soul; surely you've taught
her how to do that?  And I'm also tolerably certain I can look after
mine.  You mustn't get into the way of thinking you're the only
creature on God's earth who be out of danger.  I'm talking of our
daughter's body for the minute, not her soul, and if the Plymouth
doctor says a certain thing--a man of great knowledge too--and you
have reason to believe that Margery may have some ideas in the same
direction, then I say it's well within reason, and religion also, to
turn it over before you turn it down."

"And I say that you lie," answered Mrs. Huxam firmly.  "As to reason,
I don't know and don't want to know.  I hate the word.  I know where
reason will bring most humans, despite their Saviour's blood poured
in a river for them.  And I will speak for religion and our child's
eternity and only that; and I tell you that any such horror as her
going back to her old life would shut the door of Heaven against her
for evermore.  And that you know as well as I do; and I hope you'll
call on God to forgive you for pretending to doubt it.  And I hope
God will forgive you, else you'll soon be in pretty sad trouble
yourself."

Mr. Huxam did not immediately reply, but the adamant conviction with
which Judith spoke impressed him.  He did indeed suspect that from
the standpoint of religion she might be right; but he excused himself.

"A father is a father," he said, "and if natural longing, to see my
only daughter strong and happy again, led me to offend--well, you
must make allowance for human weakness, Judy."

"A father is a father as you say, Barlow; and a Heavenly Father is a
Heavenly Father; and if you're not prepared to say 'Thy will be done'
at your time of life, then I can assure you that it's a very hopeless
attitude.  We want to make Margery's soul sure for God.  We want to
know that when we're safe through the Vale, our children--the souls
we have been allowed to bring on earth--will follow us to our eternal
home, or go in front, as in the case of our Thomas.  The order of
going is God's business, but the road is ours, and having the Light,
what shall be said of the human parent that would let a child stray
on the wrong road if he could prevent it?  You're playing with
everlasting fire for your only daughter--that's what you're doing
to-night."

"Then we'll go to sleep," said Mr. Huxam.  "I quite understand she's
in Higher Hands, and I also grant the duty to the soul is higher than
the duty to the body.  We'll see her together to-morrow, and tackle
the subject, and try to find the right road for Margery--where body
and soul both will be looked after."

But his wife would not let him go to sleep.  She was roused into a
very vivid wakefulness and she poured a long and steady flood of
dogma into Barlow's weary ears.  His answers became fewer and she
talked him into unconsciousness at last; but she did not sleep
herself; and thus it came about that while Margery was dressing and
putting on all the warm clothes that she could wear, her mother,
fifteen yards away in the rambling, old house, remained very wide
awake, her senses strung to dismay and her soul in arms.  She had
forgotten Margery and was now in deep trouble concerning Barlow's
salvation.

Mrs. Huxam left her bed presently and knelt down to pray.  But she
found it exceedingly cold and rose and wrapped a dressing-gown about
her, before she knelt again.  It was then, in the stillness of a
moonlit and frosty night, the time being a little after half past two
o'clock, that Judith heard the shutting of the outer side door below
her.  There could be no doubt.  The private entrance was closed
gently, and it must first have been opened.  Barlow slept and the
room was dark save for the square of light where a white blind hid
the window.  She drew on her shoes, put the nearest garment, a
flannel petticoat, over her head and left the room.  She wasted no
time in seeking for Margery, but descended at once, reached the door,
found it unlocked, opened it and went into the street.  The cold
struck her like a blow and she gasped unconsciously.  Thirty yards
away, a woman moved in the moonlight and Judith knew that it was her
daughter.  She followed instantly and ran to overtake her.  Hearing
footsteps, Margery turned and, in a moment, her mother was beside her.

"Thank God!" was all Mrs. Huxam said, while the younger nearly felt,
then strove to hurry on.

"Go back, go back, mother!" she implored.  "You're wise,--you
understand.  It must be so.  God has brought me to see it.  Nought
happens but by the will of God."

"Turn--turn and don't take the Name, Margery.  Quick--quick!  You
shall come back.  Quick then, for your soul's sake, before the frost
strikes you dead in the act of sin.  The will of God--yes--His
will--to send me to save you--to head you off from death.  The will
of the devil you'd set out to do--and I've come between by the mercy
of our sleepless Father.  Come back to me--come back to
righteousness, Margery; come back and praise your Maker Who sent a
faithful mother to save you."

She used physical force while she talked.  Their breath rose in the
air; the old woman's high-pitched voice echoed in the silent street;
Judith dragged at Margery, while she, numbly conscious of the great
cold, found herself not strong enough to shake her mother off.  Mrs.
Huxam held on and prayed aloud, with a vigour that mastered the wife
of Jacob, until Margery felt her will perishing and her limbs
refusing to resist.  One last effort was made.

"Think before you hale me back," she said.  "Oh, mother, think!  It's
either going home, or dying--I know it."

"'Home!'  Where's your home?  Don't you understand yet?  Have you
drunk poison unbeknownst to us?  Brace your body to do your soul's
work, Margery!  There's only one home for the spirits of the just
made perfect.  Trust your mother, who's wearied your Maker's ear for
you ever since you were born.  Trust me, I say.  Am I nothing?  Don't
you want Heaven, if only for my sake?  Well I know you do.  Praise
God for His blessings and set your foot firm on the only way.  That's
right--that's right.  Lean on me and praise your Maker.  Oh,
child--you poor, strayed sheep--did you think to go through this icy
night all that way to hell?  But you'd have fallen frozen--frozen in
your sin--and then the loving Lord's self couldn't have saved you.
But you're safe now--safe, safe, Margery.  The angels are singing
over the sinner that was saved.  We should hear 'em if our ears
weren't stopped with earth.  That's my brave child, with her hand in
God's and the powers of darkness routed.  Off they go!  You can
almost see 'em--and the Children of Light guide you home."

She half supported, half dragged Margery back; then she helped her to
her room still pouring out a flood of speech.  Mrs. Huxam had grown a
little hysterical herself.  Her daughter fell quite silent, and
submitted, like a child, to be undressed.  But suddenly a moment of
futile passion loosed her lips and she turned on her mother.

"You've brought me back to my death," she said.  "Understand that,
grasp hold of it.  Your work to shorten my poor days and crush out my
last hope.  I shall never rise again off this bed--never, never!"

As she spoke, Mr. Huxam, who had been awakened, appeared at the
doorway in a red dressing-gown and white wool night-cap.

"Praise God, father, praise God--lift your voice to the sleepless
Everlasting!" cried Judith.  "The Powers of Darkness are shattered
and our girl's safe--safe!"

"Never did I doubt it," answered the man, and then he busied himself
and begged his wife to come to bed.

But Judith would not leave Margery.

"I sleep with her--with my arms round her--with her head on the
breast that gave her life and the heart that has beat for her since
she was born.  Be off to your chamber, Barlow, and sleep no more, but
praise God.  All's well--all's well now!"

Huxam, ignorant of what had happened, went his way, and Judith joined
her daughter; while under the sinking moon, where winter trees spread
their boughs above Lydia Bridge and the great arc of the waterfall
flashed with a thousand sparks of white fire, Jeremy Huxam tramped
the frosty road, stamped his feet, looked to the covering of his
horse, flung his rug over it, and growled words seldom heard from one
of the Chosen Few.  For an hour he waited and several times paced the
footpath by the river beneath, to meet his sister.  But she did not
come and, heartily glad of it, the man at last set out for home.
Under the darkness before dawn, he trotted off, his horse's hoofs
ringing noisily upon the frozen lanes.




CHAPTER XI

AFTER THE WEDDING

None but Jeremy and his wife ever heard particulars concerning that
night, and it was only through his sister's confession to Jane that
her husband learned why she did not come.  Mrs. Huxam never guessed
who had been waiting for Margery; indeed she did not know that
anybody had waited, and felt little doubt that she had saved her
child's body as well as soul.  For her own part she came through the
experience unhurt; but Margery suffered.  Judith's excitation of mind
had apparently served as armour against the inclement night and she
was none the worse, while her daughter's debility and depression
offered an easier prey to the cold.

Margery had been chilled and, for two days, the doctor feared.  Then
the immediate danger diminished, though the inherent source of
mischief increased.  From that night indeed it gained upon Margery
and solved for her the problem of attending the wedding.  She left
her bed again, but could not leave the house.

Then Barlow Huxam asserted himself and insisted that the date of the
wedding should be altered if Margery wished it; but she did not wish
it.  She knew that her chances of taking any part in the day were
over.  It was understood that Avis and Robert would spend five
minutes with her, on their way to the station after they were
married, and the wedding meal at Red House had been taken.

To this entertainment more were bidden than cared to come; but the
Elvins and Robert's friends sufficed to brighten the feast that Jacob
had planned.  For him the knowledge that Margery was too unwell to
attend the service robbed the day of its sole salt; but he went
through with the business and carried himself cheerfully.

There came Robert's mother and various relations, William Marydrew
and others, including John Henry from Bullstone; but while the Huxams
attended the service, they did not, of course, proceed to the bridal
breakfast, nor were they troubled to decline, for Jacob knew it was
impossible to invite them.  He ventured to ask the Winters, however,
and Adam was minded to go, but his aunt refused and prevented him
from doing so.

"There's some things that are seemly and some that are not, and women
are generally more understanding to know one from t'other than men,"
she said.  "Your judgment tells you that you and poor Margery can't
well meet no more under one roof, unless it's the Lord's roof o'
Sundays; but with regard to this wretched man, just because that
thing happened about Samuel, you have lost sight of the truth of him
and seem to reckon there's no indecency in having truck with him.  It
may be Christian, but it ain't manners.  I've never yet felt as my
Christianity comes between me and my dignity, and I'm sorry you do."

"I'll not go, then," answered her nephew.  "It can make no difference
to him."

Many, indeed, attended the service who had no intention of joining
the subsequent gathering.  Jacob gave Avis away, and Auna was her
bridesmaid; while for Robert, his elder brother, home from sea for a
while, acted as best man.

The Huxams sat in church together, and Auna heard from Jane, before
the wedded pair set out for Red House, that Margery was not so well
that day.  Auna kept her bad news until all was over at home and Avis
and Robert had driven off together.  Then she sought Jacob who sat
alone, thankful to be alone, and told him that her mother was worse.
But she came to the sad matter slowly, dwelt first on all that had
happened, and declared that everything had fallen out very
triumphantly.

"Dear old Mr. Marydrew sat by me at the feast," said Auna, "and Mr.
Middleweek sat on the other side of me, and they were both very
cheerful indeed--even George, though George is no believer in
marriage."

"Isn't he, Auna?"

"Oh, no.  He and Billy talked about it, and Billy says there's more
happy marriages than not; and George said the happy ones be like a
corncrake in the hayfield--oftener heard of than seen.  And he said
that marriage was like living in a shop all the time--buying, or
selling--haggling and trying to get a cheap bargain on one side and
holding out for the price on the other.  But I'm sure George don't
mean all the acid things he says about people marrying.  And Mr.
Marydrew talked very hopefully of the next world, and says he'll be a
farmer up there and begin all over again.  But he much hopes the
Happy Land won't want such a lot of muck spread on it as Dartmoor
does."

Jacob smiled, while she chattered; then she came to the bad news
gently.

"I hope that mother will be strong enough to have a little tell with
Avis and Bob before they start," she said; "but I'm terrible sorry to
say dear mother ain't very peart this morning.  Aunt Jane told me
about it after Avis was married.  I talked to her and Uncle Jeremy in
the churchyard, and they both said it was a very beautiful wedding in
their opinion, and Avis never looked so fine.  But mother's gone
weak.  There ain't no nature in her."

He sighed.

"You'd best to go in first thing to-morrow.  And we'll send her some
goats' milk again.  It did her good last summer.  I made her drink
some red wine, once, when she got too thin years ago.  Burgundy it is
called.  I'll see the doctor about her.  He doesn't like me; but he
won't fear to name wine for her if he thinks it would be a right
thing."

"Grandmother wouldn't suffer mother to drink wine, father."

"As medicine she would."

"So she would then," agreed Auna.  "Medicine can't be wicked.  And
Jesus Christ turned water into wine for happy people at a wedding, so
why shouldn't unhappy people be allowed a drop?  I asked grandmother
that once, and she looked at me unkindly.  She doesn't like me very
much."

"Because you haven't thrown me over, Auna."

"Throw you over!" exclaimed the girl.  "What would there be left if I
hadn't got you?  There's nobody else in the world, till mother comes
home again; and sometimes I think she never will, father."

"But sometimes you think that she's going to?  You hope still, don't
you?"

She saw how eager he was and regretted her speech.

"Yes, I do sometimes.  I believe, if we could take her a pair of
wings and tell her to fly, she would fly.  And she'd fly straight to
Red House I expect.  She don't like the post-office, and she don't
even like grandfather's new house overmuch I'm afraid."

"I'd be the wings to help her fly, Auna, if I could.  She should fly
quick enough if I thought she wanted to fly--aye, though I had to
break down her father's walls to let her out."

Auna was struck dumb by the vision.

"I wish I could see her alone, but 'tis harder and harder to do now
she mostly keeps her room.  A girl ought to be able to see her mother
alone at my age; but grandmother don't make me welcome now, and she
hustles me off for one thing and another."

"She thinks evil--that's why.  She thinks you are on my side against
her, Auna."

"If she's against you, then I'm against her.  I've stopped loving her
this good while now, because she won't let me talk about you to
mother.  And I can see in mother's eyes that she's wishful to hear.
And it's cruel I can't tell her about things."

Jacob considered and weighed the gravity of the situation.  There was
still no link between himself and his wife but such as Auna could
furnish.

And as Bullstone reflected, Avis and her husband came before Margery
at the post-office.

She was in bed to-day, but she sat up while the pair stood beside
her.  They were going to Exeter for a week of honeymoon, and Avis
promised to see the cathedral and listen to an anthem.

"There's no Chosen Few in Exeter, so far as grandmother knows," said
Robert's bride; "but she thinks there will be no harm if we worship
in the cathedral o' Sunday.  And we're going to the Museum also."

"Now tell me about the wedding.  Did Bob speak out brave and clear,
Avis?"

"Yes he did then--so loud that one or two in the church tittered--so
Auna told us after.  And I spoke out loud too.  And grandfather and
father signed the book in the vestry; and pretty near everybody
waited to see me and Robert march out.  And there was a lot of rice
flung at me in the churchyard by old Billy Marydrew, but grandmother
said he didn't ought."

"I do hope you'll soon be better," said Robert.  "Mother's very
wishful for you to come up to Owley in the spring time.  She's dearly
like for you to come, Mrs. Bullstone."

"And so would I like it, and perhaps I will, Bob," answered Margery.
"Tell me more who was in the church."

"Miss Winter and Mr. Winter," began young Elvin, but Avis stopped him.

"Hush, Robert!" she said.

"No call to hush, Avis.  I'm very glad they was there," declared
Margery.

"They didn't come to Red House after, of course," continued Avis;
"but a rally of neighbours did, and Bob's mother and his sailor
brother sat by father, and Mr. Rupert Elvin, Bob's great-uncle,
proposed the health of the bride."

"And Mr. Bullstone gave us a proper banquet--I never saw such a
spread and never shall again I'm sure," vowed Robert.

"Father was pretty cheerful I hope?" asked Margery, and Avis looked
uncomfortable.

Robert answered.

"He was, because it was kept from him and all of us that you weren't
very well to-day.  And he told me that he'd hoped you might be there;
but no doubt the reason against was your poor state, Mrs. Bullstone."

"Hush, Robert," said Avis.

"You must call me 'mother' now, Bob," replied Margery.  "You've got
two mothers now; and so has Avis."

"And very gay and proud I'm sure," said Robert.  "And I'll send you a
bit of good foreign fruit from Exeter, mother, to cheer you up."

"Don't you waste your money, Bob."

"You know Owley's mine, now, mother?" asked Avis.

"I do, and very good news; and I hope you thanked your father for it.
Very few young people get such a fine start in life.  A very good
father to you, my dear."

Avis did not answer, but Robert felt constrained to do so.

"So I tell her, and I hope Mr. Bullstone won't never have cause to be
sorry.  God willing, he never shall."

"That's right, Bob.  Avis have got you to thank also."

"And John Henry feels that, if I have Owley, he ought to have
Bullstone," added Avis.

"All in good time I expect.  Father will do fair and right by every
one."

They talked a little longer, then Mrs. Huxam appeared.

"'Tis time you was away," she said.  "Your grandfather and I and a
few more are just walking down to see the train off, and the carriage
is waiting for you and the luggage is at the station.  So be off in
five minutes.  You'll be all right, Margery?  I shan't be gone very
long."

She departed and soon afterwards Avis and Robert bade the invalid
'good-bye.'  She kissed them, then heard laughter and cheerful words
below, looked out the window and saw the carriage with two grey
horses drive off.  There was a white satin bow on the coachman's
whip.  She crept back to bed again and her heart throbbed.  She had
grown weaker, and she cried now, not at the emotion of the moment,
but before the whole spectacle of her shattered life and maimed
existence.  In her present state she had ceased even to lament the
failure of her last effort to return home.  Now she felt that was no
great matter.  She was enfeebled, indifferent and had lost the will
to live.  But there grew in her one desire: a great wish to see her
husband again and bid him farewell.  None would help her on her side;
but if he received a direct message from her, it was certain that
Jacob would come.

She could no longer concentrate her mind for more than a few minutes
at a time, and was sleeping when her mother returned to her.




CHAPTER XII

A PROBLEM FOR AUNA

Jacob Bullstone now did a thing he had not yet and sought Dr. Briggs,
the medical man who was attending his wife.  The physician had been
Margery's doctor of old and knew her well.  He allowed himself great
latitude of language at the time of the separation and he entertained
violent dislike of Jacob.  Bullstone waited on him and, without
concealing his aversion, the thin, grey-whiskered practitioner
snapped his evil tidings.

"There is no reason, I imagine, why you should be kept in ignorance.
Your wife, so to call her, is exceedingly ill, and the natural
weakness, which I was able to combat pretty effectually of old, has
now gone much further."

"She's taking iron I hope?" inquired Jacob, and the other regarded
him with aversion.

"Need you ask?  The iron has entered into her soul--not the iron I
gave, however.  You'll say I'm not professional and so forth.
Perhaps you don't want to know the reasons for this collapse--only
the extent of it.  Perhaps you do know the reasons?  At any rate I
can repeat to you, as I have a dozen times to her parents, that the
old tendency to an√¶mia, owing to certain obscure defects of the
nourishing system and so forth, have, under her fearful mental
trials, become chronic and are now developing the gravest symptoms.
A few weeks ago she suffered from a sharp chill during the recent
harsh weather.  It threatened immediate danger; but I got her through
that.  You cannot, however, minister to a mind diseased."

"Perhaps the one that gave the poison might best find the antidote,"
said Bullstone humbly, and the doctor looked at him with some
bitterness.

"There's no antidote for this poison," he answered.

"And do you feel any reason to doubt that the spring will see a
change for the better?"

"Seasons have nothing to do with it.  She is little likely to see
another spring.  The constitution has broken and the will power has
gone.  She feels no desire to go on living, and I cannot create that
desire in her.  Nor can any of her family."

"Have they tried?"

"Naturally.  You do not imagine they want her to die.  With an√¶mia a
patient gets ups and downs, which flatter hope, or increase fear.
But we are far past these stages of the ailment.  Her vitality ebbs
with increasing quickness, and I cannot stem the tide."

"Do you not feel that a second opinion might be desirable?"

"I have taken a second opinion.  Mr. Nettleship, of Plymouth, saw her
several weeks ago."

"I was not told of that."

"Possibly not.  He came one evening and took even a more serious view
of the case than I did.  The event has proved he was correct.  He has
devoted special study to the disease."

"Nothing can be done, then, Dr. Briggs?"

"Nothing that is not being done."

They parted and it was upon the same night--an occasion that found
Jacob sleepless and in mental torment--that there broke upon him a
great, unknown fact.  Through Auna it came, three days after the
wedding; but Auna herself had passed through a mighty ordeal and
suffered much tribulation in her young mind, before she could bring
herself finally to reveal the truth to her father.  Long she fought,
until at last, lying sleepless and worn out, she determined to tell
Jacob what she knew.  She rose, went to him then and there, found him
awake and spoke.

It had happened thus.  On the morning after the wedding of Avis, at
Jacob's will, Auna set out immediately after breakfast for the
post-office, to learn how her mother might be.  On the way she was
passed by Adam Winter, driving some pigs to the railway station, and
he stopped and offered her a lift.  Thus the duration of her journey
was shortened and her heart was a little lifted by the man's cheerful
words.

As others, who had known her mother of old, Adam saw Margery again in
Auna--the slim, quick shape, the eager eyes, the steadfast
cheerfulness.  And Auna's devotion to her desolate father touched
some hearts vaguely.  The rest of the children had slipped away from
him and loosened bonds never very tight; but she remained and still
strove with youthful obstinacy to build up the broken walls of her
home.  Her life was largely spent in going backwards and forwards,
and she seemed conscious of the significance of her task, for a sort
of gravity now belonged to her.  Her young face was moulded into a
solemn expression and care clouded her eyes.

She told Adam that her mother was worse.

"Else I'm sure she'd have made a brave try to get to church
yesterday, to see Avis married."

"I'm sure she would," he answered, "but no doubt her thoughts were
there and you'll be able to tell her what a fine send-off they had--a
good flash of sunshine and all."

"Father's taking it hard, and I'm going as quick as I may, in hopes
to hear she's better."

"And I hope you will hear it.  You'll be able to tell her what a good
wedding it was--everything just perfect if she'd only been there.
How does your father's leg go on?"

"Very clever he says.  The pin bone was broke.  And he's quite
forgiven Sammy, because he knows that he never would have done it, if
he'd been like other people, Mr. Winter."

"I'm very sure of that, Auna.  Tell your father I'll come in and
smoke a pipe along with him some night pretty soon.  He didn't ought
to be on his leg too much just yet I reckon--a heavy man like him."

At the station Auna alighted and arrived at the post-office an hour
earlier than usual.  The accident proved fruitful, for her
grandmother, while expecting the girl, had no reason to suppose she
would appear for some time.  Judith was occupied in the post-office
and Barlow had gone over to his son.  Thus Auna slipped up to her
mother's room quite unobserved.  She was delighted; but Margery's
appearance cast her down.

"Oh, dear, mother, you're as white as a dog's tooth!" she said.

Margery, however, flushed a little to see her.

"Come close, my pretty.  I've slept ill; I'll be better presently.
I've always got a headache now and I can't let down my food very
clever."

"I've brought some of the goats' milk--fresh this morning."

"You're early to-day."

"Started early and got here ever so quick, because Mr. Winter was
bringing in pigs and gave me a lift.  Grandmother doesn't know I've
come yet.  Nobody does."

"Talk low then.  She won't be up for half an hour, if she thinks I'm
alone."

"Have you had a good breakfast?"

"Ever so good.  How's father after the wedding?"

"Very sad indeed, because you're bad.  Oh, mother, he'd have given
all he's got in the world if he could have come this morning instead
of me."

"He'd like to come?"

"You well know it.  If you'd lift your little finger, he'd come."

Margery smiled.

"When I could lift my little finger, I didn't.  Now I can't,
perhaps----"

"But if he knew you even wanted to----"

"How's his leg, Auna?"

"Better and better.  But Mr. Winter says he mustn't use it too much,
because he's a heavy man.  But he isn't as heavy as he was.  He's
thinner round the waist, mother."

"Is he?  And is Adam Winter kindly to him?"

"Very kindly.  He was cruel sorry for father's fearful fall.  He'd
have had Sammy put away, but father forgave him, and Sammy's forgot
all about it now."

Margery reflected and stroked the girl's hand.

Their hands were very much alike, save that the elder's had grown
thin and white.

"You must bear up at what I'm going to say, Auna; but I'm terrible
afraid I'm going to die before so very long.  Not afraid because I'm
going to die.  That's nothing to mind when you feel like I feel; but
afraid because it will make you and father and the boys and Avis
sorrowful."

"Going to die!" gasped Auna.  "No, no, no, mother, don't 'e die yet a
while!  Think on father.  If you died, he'd never be happy again, and
he's been unhappy such a longful time now; and if you died, he'd die
himself very likely."

"Perhaps I won't then.  But I feel terrible bad.  And you can tell
father one thing.  He wanted to see me, Auna, and he wanted me back
at home?"

"Of course he did--cruel he wanted you back."

"But he didn't know I wanted to come back.  You can tell him I wanted
to come back.  It may make him feel happier."

"But why didn't you come?  Oh, mother, why didn't you?"

"I tried to come when I heard he wanted me.  Yes, I tried.  Only it
was too late then.  Things fell out and I couldn't do it.  But tell
him I tried and failed.  It may comfort him to know I tried, Auna."

The door had opened an inch and somebody was listening behind it; but
neither Margery nor her daughter knew that they were overheard.

"Mother, mother," cried Auna, "if he had known--if he'd only known!
Why, he'd have come for you himself, and the whole world wouldn't
have kept him from you!"

"There were reasons why he shouldn't know till I'd got to him.  But
that's all one now.  Wrong or right, you can tell father I tried.  In
time that will be good to him to remember."

"So I will then.  Oh, if you'd only come, you'd have got well so
quick!  You must come yet.  You must be drove in a shut-up cab all
the way.  I'll tell father you tried, and then----"

Mrs. Huxam entered, without any indication that she had overheard
this vital matter.

"Why, Auna!" she said.  "Here already--popped in like a mouse.  Don't
you tire mother.  She's had a bad night."

"Mother looks terrible ill," said Auna.

Margery had turned away to the wall, for a wave of excitement made
her heart beat painfully and she felt faint.  Judith ministered to
her.

"I expect mother's talked enough," she said.  "The doctor hasn't seen
her yet.  I wouldn't leave the goats' milk, because it isn't the
right thing for her now.  You can take it over to Aunt Jane for the
baby.  It will be just right for him."

"So I will then," said Auna.  "And I'll wait till Dr. Briggs has seen
mother, so as I can tell father what he says."

Mrs. Huxam agreed to this arrangement.

"You'd better go then, and come back in half an hour," she said
quietly.  "I'll tell you what doctor says presently."

Auna kissed her mother, who lay with closed eyes, and after the kiss,
she whispered, "I'll tell him."  Then she went downstairs, carrying
her little milk can.  And when she was gone, Judith spoke cheerfully
to Margery, but made no mention of what she had overheard, though her
mind was full of it.  The old woman perceived a tremendous peril
suddenly created by Margery's confession to Auna.  A possibility
existed of evading it; but the possibility was slight and the danger
itself enormous.  No instant disaster threatened, and yet the day
could hardly end without bringing it.  She saw a great battle lying
immediately ahead and knew that for some temptations flight must be
the only successful opposition.  For the moment everything hinged
upon Auna, and Auna was a broken reed in her grandmother's opinion.
Auna had ceased to be single-hearted; she had never taken her stand,
as her brothers and sister had taken it, on the side of religion and
justice.  Yet now into Auna's ears had been given a tremendous
message--a message which might have been whispered by the devil
himself rather than the poor victim of Bullstone's evil-doing.  It
was a message which, if it reached Margery's husband, would produce
instant and violent response.  Once let him know that Margery had so
far condoned her wrongs as to attempt a return to Red House, and he
might yet confound all, even in sight of salvation.  For, from
Judith's standpoint, salvation was now in sight.  The message must
not be delivered if she could prevent it, and she would have arrested
Auna, locked her up, or taken any other direct action, had it been in
her power to do so.  But that was impossible; therefore she had asked
the girl to return, in order to influence her and win a promise.  At
best, however, she doubted the value of a promise, even if she could
win it.  John Henry, Avis, or Peter she could have trusted to keep
any promise given; Auna she did not trust, by virtue of the taint
that made her put an erring father first in all things.

When presently her grandchild returned, Judith drew her into the
little, front parlour, shut the door and set about her task.  The
doctor had offered scant shadow of hope and Mrs. Huxam perceived that
he did not think Margery would live.  To her that was already an
accepted fact.  But she knew many worse dangers than death.

"Auna," she said.  "I hope no grandchild of mine would ever tell a
lie."

Auna reflected, looking straight into the calm, white face.  Her
answer indeed demanded no thought; but her mind was already concerned
with what might have inspired the question.

She was so long in answering that Judith expressed displeasure.

"Surely, surely, you're not godless enough to want to think about it,
Auna?"

"Of course not, grandmother, I'm sure none of us ever told you a lie.
Why for should we?"

"The devil's very clever at putting people in a position where
there's temptations to lie.  It's one of his favourite traps for boys
and girls, and they have to be warned against it from their youth up.
Now listen, Auna; and mind this: your dear mother's soul may be the
matter.  Because first I may tell you, she has gone very weak of
late--weak in body and mind by the will of God."

"I know she's terrible weak in body, and she thinks she may die of it
even; but her mind is all right, grandmother."

"Her mind is all wrong," answered Judith.  "That's what too well I
know, and you do not.  And now her mind has gone wrong, then it is
for all that love her to be doubly anxious and careful."

"Yes," said Auna.  "For all that love her."

"It's God's will that the strong should fight for the weak, and never
more than when the weak have run into danger unknowing.  Human
weakness is the devil's strength, and he knows it, and where the sick
creature is there will that old vulture, the devil, be hopping round
about.  I'm speaking of your mother's everlasting soul, Auna, not her
body.  And it pleases God sometimes to let us worms do His work, even
in such a high matter as a soul.  Not long ago it was the Almighty's
will that I should save your dear mother from a terrible danger.  It
was my blessing and pride and joy to come between my child and the
devil, in all his fearful power and might; and a greater joy for a
human parent God couldn't offer.  That's done; the battle was won and
your mother knows what I did for her.  But while there's life in man,
there's hope in the devil, and he's not done with mother yet."

Auna was indignant.

"The devil never had anything to do with dear mother," she said.
"Nobody ever gave God less trouble than mother.  She's
good--good--and who don't know it?"

"Listen, and don't talk to me in that tone of voice.  Just now,
before you left her, it pleased the Lord that I should overhear what
she was saying to you.  I heard her tell you that she'd tried to go
to Red House, didn't she?"

"Yes, grandmother."

"That was the devil, Auna--sleepless to catch your mother's soul; and
the will to go was only less terrible than the deed.  The deed was
prevented; but now I've heard a very dreadful thing, because the will
to do wrong may destroy the soul, just as well as the deed itself.
And for that matter, Jesus Christ says one's as bad as the other."

She stopped to study the girl's face, but Auna only looked very sulky.

"And now," continued Mrs. Huxam, "you--you--her youngest child--have
the blessed power to help your mother; and God's waiting and
listening up in Heaven, to see if you will help her."

"I don't understand that."

"You will in a minute.  You were told--not by your dear mother, Auna,
but by the Evil One, who's often allowed to speak through our human
lips, that she wanted to go back to Red House and couldn't; and she
told you to tell your father that."

"So she did; and so I shall," answered Auna firmly.

"So you must not; that's why I was sent to overhear the fatal words
and save you from repeating them to your father."

"I promised to, because mother thought it would make father happier;
and so it will, granny; oh, it will do that when he knows."

"You promised, because you knew not why you promised, or who you
promised.  But you are not going to keep your promise, because to
keep it would be threatening new danger to your mother's soul.  A
soul's never safe till it's out of the body, Auna.  Always remember
that.  Many and many a soul has been lost on a death-bed, where the
devil's grabbed them at the last moment."

"How would it hurt dear mother's soul to know that father was a
little happier, granny?"

"It hurts your mother's soul to think on your father at all.  I'm not
your father's judge, and nothing that your mother, or anybody else,
can do will alter the wages of such sins as his.  And the way you act
about your father is a very great sorrow to all of us; for you've
been taught to know far better.  But what matters now is that for
your mother's sake--your dying mother's sake, Auna--he must not know
what she said.  Your mother's soul it may mean, for God wills that a
soul shall hang on a thread above the bottomless pit sometimes; and
such a little thing as a child's hand may push it down.  Therefore
the man must never know that your mother wanted to see him."

"Why not?" asked Auna.  "How will it be bad for dear mother's soul
that she's made poor father a little bit happier?  Hasn't he had
enough to bear?"

"You ask why.  John Henry wouldn't ask why, nor yet Peter, nor Avis."

"I love my father a long sight better than they do; and I'm full of a
great wanting to make him happier; and so's mother--full of a great
wanting to do it too.  And father's full of a cruel, fierce wanting
to make her a bit happier if only he could get to her.  And if he
knew she was dying and longed to see him----"

Auna broke down and wept bitterly, while Mrs. Huxam considered.  She
pretended to assume a situation not as yet attained.

"Don't cry, but do your duty like a good girl, and leave the rest in
Higher Hands, as we all must.  There's a holy word that tells how a
'backbiting tongue hath cast out virtuous women, and deprived them of
their labours; and whoso harkeneth to it shall never find rest.'
That's what you are doing now, Auna, and neighbouring with one whose
sentence is known and understood.  But your Saviour may rescue you
yet I hope.  All you need to do now is to think on your poor, wronged
mother, who has been deprived of her labours and is going to die.
But she mustn't be robbed of her heavenly home as well--not by any
word of yours.  And so you promise, on your word of honour before God
Almighty, not to tell your father, or any other living creature, what
you heard from mother's lips this morning."

Auna began to see the object of this solemn command.

"You think that father, knowing that, would dash to dear mother
willy-nilly?" she asked.

This, indeed, was the terror that now crowded close over Judith.  She
spoke and thought with absolute sincerity, believing that any contact
with Jacob Bullstone now might largely endanger her daughter's hope
of salvation.  Indeed she felt the peril to be terrific--a direct
encounter between herself and the Powers of Darkness.  They were hard
at work, as she expected them to be.  Even did Auna finally give her
word, such was the girl's apparent reaction to the influence of her
father, that Mrs. Huxam already looked ahead and planned the next
step.  She was not going to trust her granddaughter in any case.
Auna at least perceived the immediate peril and her grandmother
answered her question.

"I fear it; for these awful threats are allowed by God," Judith
replied.  "I think if your lost father was to hear this, a great and
terrible thing might happen, for he'd believe that it was your
mother's real voice, because his eyes are darkened to truth, and he'd
think this devil's message came from herself.  The devil says that
the next best thing to getting your mother back to Red House is to
let your father know she wanted to come back.  Therefore I'll beg you
this instant moment, Auna, to promise me before the great, living God
that you'll be dumb about it and not act the devil's messenger.  Why
do you hesitate?  What are you made of?  Is your mother's soul
nothing to you?"

Judith went down on her knees and drew Auna beside her; but still the
girl did not speak.  She had not the bent of mind to echo the
attitude of her grandmother, or respond to the awful convictions of
the elder.  But she was impressed.  She knew that her grandmother had
a deep knowledge of the next world, and she believed very firmly
indeed that there were such places as heaven and hell.  The idea that
her mother might by the remotest possibility lose heaven, stung Auna
sharply.  From sorrow and terror, she began to grow dazed at this
terrible glimpse into the snares that awaited even saintly souls.
Was it possible that not her sad-eyed mother, but a crafty fiend
lurking behind her pale lips, had said these things?  For a moment
she forgot her father, and then, under the stressful words of Judith,
she promised not to tell him.  But the very act of promising brought
him back to her.  Whether a devil had spoken them or not, it was very
certain that the words she had heard from her mother would be of the
utmost consolation and comfort to her father.  That Auna knew
exceedingly well; yet she had now promised; and she hated her
grandmother as her young heart had never before hated any living
thing.

Having sworn, she escaped without another word, and Judith perceiving
the girl's suffering and hearing the panting indignation that
followed her surrender, felt very far from certain that she would
keep her oath.  She believed that, as surely as Jacob Bullstone heard
his wife had tried to come back to him, he would return to her and
force his way into her presence, with the strength of a madman if
need be; and she knew that between that inevitable sequel, with its
possible consequences for Margery, there stood only the exceeding
frail barrier of a wayward grandchild's promise.  It was not enough
for any margin of security and every mental energy must now be poured
into the problem now confronting her--so Judith felt.  She fell upon
her knees again and remained for half an hour as motionless as the
chair over which she bent.  Then she rose, her mind affirmed and her
decision taken.  She perceived that an issue so tremendous could not
be left to the doubtful honour of Auna, while she herself might take
more certain steps to protect her child.

And meantime the girl went home in deepest tribulation.  She had
never lied, and for a long time her sorrow centred in the thought
that she had given a promise not possible to break.  Once she stopped
and turned back, suddenly fired to see her grandmother again and take
back her oath.  But she knew that would be vain.  She had promised
and there could be no escape save through falsehood.  Auna believed a
lie to be among the deepest of crimes; yet in half an hour she was
pursuing trains of thought that did not embrace her own soul's
safety, but only her parents.  Her mind ran wholly on her father
first, and then upon her mother.  A human instinct inclined her to
doubt whether the outlook in the next world was as dangerous as her
grandmother declared.

She hated going home at all now.  She dawdled, wandered by the river,
felt her heart full of a great pity for her father that this most
precious information must be denied him.

"But of course it's no good telling dear father what the devil said,"
she reflected; and then, pursuing this melancholy thought, another
arose out of it and Auna sat by the stream and stayed her progress,
quite weighed down by an arrestive idea.

If the devil could talk through her dear mother's lips, then, surely,
nothing that anybody said was quite safe, for it followed that other
people might also be subjected to his dreadful cunning and innocently
voice his purpose.  And if so, why not her grandmother as well as
anybody else?  Evidently natural goodness could be no safeguard, for
she knew her mother to be as good as an angel in heaven.  Her father
had said so a thousand times.  Perhaps, indeed, thought Auna, the
devil delighted to make the most saintly people his mouthpiece.  It
was such an added infamy as she could understand might well gratify
him.  But, in that case, her grandmother was the least likely to
escape these awful attentions; and if the Evil One had been
whispering to Auna through her mother's lips, was it not possible,
nay probable, that he had also been speaking with the voice of Mrs.
Huxam?  Then the human mind of her, quickened by love to deal in
sophistry, reflected on another argument.  She had promised her
grandmother one thing; but not before she had promised her mother an
opposite thing.  She could not, therefore, escape a lie.  Only a
choice of lies awaited her in any case.

Auna rose and proceeded home.  She suddenly remembered how Jacob was
waiting impatiently for news, and the question of the promise sank
into a minor matter before the immediate necessity to tell him her
mother was very ill.  More than that Auna did not intend to say.  She
was not going to speak of death, because she had a suspicion that her
grandmother had exaggerated the danger to frighten her and extort her
promise.

She told her father of the grave condition reported and he was deeply
perturbed.  On the following day he visited the doctor with results
already chronicled, and Peter it was who during this morning went to
the post-office for news of Margery.  He returned with the
information that she was about the same; and upon Auna asking him if
she was still so very white, Peter answered that she was.  But later,
when she was alone with her brother in the evening, there came the
tremendous secret information that finally sent Auna in the small
hours of the next day to her father's room.

For Peter was no hand at secrets and confessed to Auna that he had
not seen their mother at all.  His grandfather had bade him keep the
information to himself for the present; but none the less Peter told
Auna, commanding profound silence from her.  Their mother had left
Brent.

"Grandmother's took her away for a change," explained Peter.  "And
grandfather was awful down about it and in a proper fret.  He says
that mother's soul have got to be saved, and he said now was the
appointed time.  But where mother's been took to, to save her soul, I
don't know, and grandfather wouldn't tell me.  And I swore I wouldn't
let it out; but it's so interesting I had to tell somebody.  You
don't matter so long as father doesn't know; and if he did it's no
odds, I reckon, for he couldn't find her."

"You've told a lie, then," mused Auna, and her brother, somewhat
uneasy, began to argue the point; but she was not blaming him.

"Nothing ever happens that didn't ought, anyway," said Peter.
"Grandmother's told us that a million times, and it gets you round a
good few corners--lies included--to remember it."

"So it does," admitted Auna.

She took this great information to bed with her, and after many
sleepless hours could endure it no longer but crept to her father.
Jacob lay awake, for he suffered deep misery over his wife's illness,
while still far from any guess that extreme danger had developed.  He
had discounted the conversation with Dr. Briggs, perceiving that the
medical man desired to hurt him, and he supposed that with time
Margery would grow stronger again, as she had after previous periods
of weakness.  It was not yet a year since he had driven her away from
him, and he could not believe that she had sunk beyond hope of rising
again to health within so short a time.  But troubled he was, for the
ultimate reconciliation seemed no nearer.  Christmas approached and
he considered if at that date he might endeavour to break down the
opposition.  His thoughts again turned to Jane and Jeremy, then to
Barlow Huxam himself.  They had taken no notice of him at the
wedding, but he had caught Mr. Huxam's eye and, though the postmaster
looked away instantly, there had been no active enmity in his
countenance.  Jacob thus dawdled on the brink of sleep, unhappy
enough, careworn enough, clinging to such shadowy hopes as rolled
from time to time uppermost in the welter of thought.

Then came Auna and he lighted his candle, tucked her into bed and
listened to her.

Once started the girl could not stop until she had told everything.

"Peter's lied and I'd sooner lie with Peter than keep my word with
grandmother, and if the devil can make one person talk, why shouldn't
he make another?  And mother didn't sound in the least like the
devil, and grandmother did," wept Auna pursuing her own reflections,
but throwing no immediate light upon the reason for her nocturnal
visit.

Jacob calmed her down and so learned, little by little, what his
daughter desired him to know.  It was impressed upon him that Margery
was actually at the point of death, that she had endeavoured to come
to him and failed, because Mrs. Huxam had prevented it; and that she
had now been taken away by her mother--but whither Peter was not told.

Leaving this cruel load of knowledge with her parent, and surprised
in her heart to find confession had so greatly calmed her spirit,
Auna went back to bed and soon slept peacefully; while Jacob rose and
dressed and prayed for the first glimmer of the day that would launch
him upon his quest.  Enormous joy and profoundest grief clashed
within him.  A great hope dawned with the morning: that he and
Margery might yet come together and that her body's salvation lay
with him.

No bird had broken silence and only the sleepless river purred under
a clear, white heaven as he rode out.  Above him the morning star
shone, like a nail of gold on a field of ivory, and lifting his heart
to the hills round about him, Jacob found his mood calm, patient,
inexorably determined.  He had never thought to wield such a weapon
as Auna had now put into his hands; but no adverse power could stand
against it, for it came direct from Margery herself.  She had striven
to reach him and failed.  Now it was his turn.




CHAPTER XIII

AT THE BARBICAN

Mrs. Huxam had made up her mind and conscious that the period of
danger must now be brief, determined to take Margery beyond it.  That
she was in no case to travel did not influence her mother, who dealt
with issues far more tremendous than life or death.  Indeed, so
absolutely was human instinct quelled by the more potent fervours of
faith, that the old woman experienced not one pang of mental
suffering before the physical suffering she now caused.

Salvation only lay by way of flight, for Auna could not be trusted.
She explained to Barlow what she was about to do, bade him get a
closed carriage as quickly as possible, herself sent a telegram to
Lawrence Pulleyblank at Plymouth, and within an hour had dressed
Margery and set off upon the long and secret drive to her brother's
home.

The sick woman protested, but she had no strength to oppose.  Judith
took food with her and at Plympton stopped and made Margery drink a
hot cup of tea.  To her daughter's repeated questions as to why this
had been done, Mrs. Huxam promised a future answer.  She concealed
her purpose during the journey and, before they had reached the house
on the Barbican, Margery was past questions.  She sank into a great
silence, which was never again broken, and she appeared to be nearly
unconscious when they arrived.  Mr. Pulleyblank, full of wonder and
pity, himself picked her up and carried her to the room she always
occupied when visiting him.  Then, when she was settled in and a
doctor sent for, Judith explained to her brother.

"Thank God we're in sight of victory!" she said with exulting eyes.
"Margery's dying, by the blessing of her Maker; but the devil have
had a hard tussle for her.  With her last remaining strength he
forced her to try and get back to Jacob Bullstone; and she'd have
been found dead with her sins upon her, but for me.  I saved her, and
now we've only got to block the man for a little longer.  Then she'll
escape for ever.  It's been a fight, Lawrence.  I've shortened my
life for Margery.  Perhaps I've shortened hers; but that's a small
thing.  A dumbness has come upon her.  The Lord has sealed her lips
for safety."

"Dying!" he said.  "D'you mean to tell me my pretty bird's really
dying?"

"Quickly, I do hope and pray.  Bringing her here will hasten it.  You
see so long as the man didn't know she wanted to go back, he was
powerless; but once it gets to him that she did want to, then well I
know he'll be on us like Apollyon.  The Evil One used her.  I heard
him speak to her child, through her lips, and the child, Auna, looked
a lie though she promised not to give the message.  I couldn't trust
her; but it's no odds now--not even if Bullstone does hear it, for
Barlow will withstand him."

"And if he came here, so would I," said Mr. Pulleyblank.  "Better the
poor dear goes down to her grave this minute than listen to any word
from that villain."

His sister gave details and presently a doctor came, heard
particulars of Margery's physical state, and expressed dismay that
she had been taken upon a journey.  But Mrs. Huxam did not trouble
herself to regret his strictures, and that he should think her an
ignorant woman was no grief to her.  He could do nothing, but
directed how best to relieve the patient and desired to send in a
nurse.  This, however, Judith refused to permit.

"I'll nurse her," she said.  "I'm her mother."

The physician called again at a later hour, but Margery, though a
trifle stronger, was only semi-conscious.  He warned them that she
could hardly survive the night, but promised to return in the
morning.  The sick woman slept heavily and seemed no worse when day
broke.  This fact Judith telegraphed to Barlow; and he had repeated
it when his grandson arrived from Red House for news.

But during that day Margery began to sink, and she had passed far
into the shadow on the following morning, when Jacob at dawn rode to
his father-in-law.  For he had saddled a horse, being unable to trust
his leg to walk to Brent.  He trembled with anger to think that she
had wanted him, and sought him, and been denied; but against his
indignation there rose one satisfaction.  That she was well enough to
travel reconciled him in some measure to the fact that she had done
so.  Her state, he reflected, must be better than was reported if she
could make even a brief journey.  He felt tolerably sure that she had
gone to her uncle at Plymouth and, ignorant of the truth, wondered
why his mother-in-law thus attempted an impossible thing.  For to
keep him from Margery, now that he knew that she wanted to come back
to him, was impossible.  No power existed competent legally to stand
between them now; and when presently he arrived at the post-office
after daybreak, while a winter sun glinted over the edge of the
earth, he asserted this fact to Barlow Huxam.

The postmaster was already up, waiting with anxiety for news by
letter or telegram from Plymouth; for while Judith had inspired him
with her own fervour and won his entire support two days before, now,
alone, faced with the dreary ordeal of waiting for tragic news and
stricken by the knowledge that he would never see Margery again, Mr.
Huxam had fallen into a nervous and melancholy agitation.

He was not much astonished to see Jacob.  Indeed he greeted him
without emotion, called a boy to hold the rider's horse and bade him
enter.

"Barlow Huxam," said Bullstone.  "One word is as good as a thousand
in this matter.  I hear that some time ago my wife wanted to come
back to her home, and to me.  She was withstood, and that's contrary
to law as you, well know.  She's ill--very ill so doctor says--and
she has been taken away against her own wish.  You're an honourable
Christian and I've wronged you and yours, and have confessed it and
suffered as few are called to suffer.  But now--now that my wife
wants me, and actually tried to come to me, I ask you, man to man, to
tell me where her mother has taken her.  Not for regard of myself do
I ask it, but for Margery's sake.  Be merciful in this matter, as
you'd ask for mercy if you stood where I stand."

"Mercy is not for us," answered Barlow.  "And if I wanted to show
mercy I could not, because it's not in my power.  And who knows what
mercy is?  What you want may not be mercy at all.  In your ignorance
you may be asking for worse things than you've earned even, or your
Maker intends."

"Let that all go.  I'm not here to split religious straws.  She wants
me, and are you to stand between your sick daughter and one she's
forgiven for his sins and wants again?  Are you going to prevent her
from coming back to the home she's made, and the home she's loved?
It might be the turning point; it might save her and make her strong
again to come back to all that's so dear to her."

Mr. Huxam was affected, more by the appearance of Jacob than his
words.  He perceived now, in the presence of the man and in the sound
of his voice, something of what had happened to him.  And there was
worse to happen, for Bullstone spoke in ignorance of the situation.
Yet for the moment, while moved, Barlow preserved an attitude laid
down by his wife, and felt no inclination to yield.

"I must tell you things that you're not likely to understand," he
answered.  "As to splitting religious straws, I never have, nor never
will do it.  But we're concerned not with straws, but large, deep
mysteries; and one of them has happened.  And you must clearly
understand that in my judgment and my wife's, it was not any
heart-felt wish of Margery's to see you that Auna heard."

"What was it then?  She tried to come; she told Auna that she wanted
to come--to come to me, and wanted me to come to her."

"Auna heard those words," admitted Huxam, "but who shall say that
Margery spoke them?  In the shadow of death she lies, and we well
know that while there's life there's fear--fear of death--not the
death of the body, but the soul."

He elaborated this opinion, while the other stared, hearing Judith
Huxam rather than her husband.

"Oh, God--to what you and the likes of you can come!" he said.
"You--the father of her, who have seen her sinless, spotless life,
and the good she has done and the evil she has suffered--you to think
her a mouthpiece for a devil.  What do you make of God?  Are you so
blind that you don't know goodness and honour and patience when you
see them?  Let me speak with the tongues of the pit, if you please;
flout me--condemn me--spit upon me.  That is just; but to stand
there--a man experienced in life, who knows human nature and believes
in an all-powerful, all-loving Father--to stand there and tell me
that her natural, woman's longing to see the home she made, and her
heavenly forgiveness, ready to return to a worthless man like me--to
say all that was the devil whispering through her lips--why, what
damned filth do you believe about heaven and hell?"

Barlow felt a twinge before this indictment.  He was too prone to
accept Judith's interpretation of all that happened, too prone to
assume that earnestness so tremendous and a faith that could move
mountains, must of necessity enable his wife to probe more deeply
into truth than saner people.

"Use your reason," added Jacob.  "I've come of late through much
torment of mind and grief of body, to see that reason's a gift of
God, without which we fall back very quickly into the night of our
forefathers.  It was loss of reason that ruined me and my home.  Let
faith do her work, Barlow Huxam, but don't flout reason with nonsense
about devils, or tell me that a saint like Margery could ever be the
plaything of the Enemy of Mankind.  Think for one moment, with the
brains God gave you to use, and you'll know that is a foul, mad
thought--a thought far liker to be bred of the devil than any that
your daughter's mind could harbour, or her lips speak.  She wants to
see me and her home again; and I ask you, as one well thought upon
for sense and human wisdom, if it will throw any shadow on her white
soul to hold my hand, and let me hear her forgive me.  You're
married.  You know the deep bond that makes woman and man one sooner
or later, no matter how vast the gulf that folly and ignorance, or
wickedness, may rip up between them.  You know that a sinner may
repent and be forgiven; and if by God, then why not by his own,
faulty, fellow-creatures?  She wants to come to her home, Barlow.
She wants to come to her home, and there's no right or justice in
hiding her, knowing that if she was strong enough she would come back
to me.  She's ill--terribly serious her illness--then so much the
more reason that a wish, that may be among her last wishes, should be
granted.  Don't stand in the way any more.  If I thought that I would
do her harm, in body or soul, I wouldn't ask; but who am I to do her
harm?  I'm human.  I've done all the harm I shall ever do.  My
life--what's left--will be bent on atoning and doing good--first to
her, then to the rest of the world.  I only live for that.  My own
life is but a means for that.  Oh, man, don't you understand what my
days are now--what I've made of them?  Can you come between me and
the last ray of light that's left for me?"

"A soul is in the balance," said Mr. Huxam uneasily.

"Granted.  But whose soul?  Not hers--not Margery's.  You're not
going to pretend that anything I could say, or do, will endanger a
soul as far above me as light above darkness.  Say my soul's in the
balance if you like, and pray God's mercy on a sinful and erring man.
Be large-hearted even for me.  We don't make ourselves.  We don't sit
at the Almighty's elbow when He plans us, and tell Him what to put
into us; we can't stand beside Him fortified with the experience of
human life and say, 'Make me brave; make me honest; make me patient;
leave lust out of me; leave jealousy out of me.'  We don't ask God to
fashion us true and plumb, of stuff fine enough to withstand the
trials and temptations common to all flesh.  We can't demand faith,
or sense, or the power to move our neighbour to goodness by example
and precept.  We have no hand in our havage, no hand in our
understanding, no hand in our weakness of will.  Then what, in the
name of Christ, is left for us but to be merciful one with another?
What is left but for the strong to deal tenderly with the weak?  You
stand among the strong ones.  You've been blessed with a clear head,
good health, perseverance, self-control and a sense of reality that
keeps your mind sweet.  You married a strong woman.  You rise above
the traps and snares of life and go your appointed way.  You had a
good daughter, married to an erring and faulty man.  And he's ruined
her life and brought her through dark places, where such a woman
should never have had to tread.  But she's not tainted--there's no
stain on her--and now--now, at the eleventh hour, she stretches out
her hands to him.  And who knows best?  Do you know better than she
does?  Is her mother wiser than she is?  God tells her to want me,
Barlow--God--God!  For His own ends--for His own ends."

The other did not speak.  This appeal, coming on his own knowledge
that his daughter was dying, distressed him much.  But it was still
the face staring into his--a face written closely over with intense
pain--a face haggard and a head growing grey--that caused him more
misery than Jacob's words.

Barlow began to cry, where he was sitting, with his hand on his
forehead by a table, and the tears fell down.

Bullstone said no more for some time.  Then he spoke again--a brief
entreaty.

"Help me to believe in the justice of God," he said.  "Don't take my
last hope.  If she is so ill, do not deny me the one and only
blessing left to me in this world: to see her again before the end."

"Who shall come between a man and his Maker?" asked Huxam.  "Who can
do that, Jacob?  I wish my wife was here.  Perhaps you would have
thrown a light for her.  It's contrary to reason to suppose such a
woman should be led wrong, but so it is contrary to reason to suppose
that Margery should be led wrong.  I grant that--I grant that.  I
never did like to think it was the devil in her.  No--no.  You're
right there.  The Lord don't desert His jewels in the Dark Valley.
That's where He's nearest and strongest.  Perhaps, in her fine fury
to save her child, my wife overlooked a thing or two."

There came a knock at the door.

"A telegram for you, Mr. Huxam," said the post-office clerk, and
Barlow took it from her hands.  There was but one word: 'Sinking.'
He held it out to Jacob and then he spoke.

"Come," he said.  "We'll go together.  And God must do as He pleases."

"Where is she?"

"At Plymouth along with her uncle."

Mr. Huxam looked at his watch, then put it into his pocket hurriedly.

"We can just catch the eight-thirty down.  Go forward and get two
tickets.  I'll come after you."

In twenty minutes they were on their way to Plymouth in a third-class
carriage, empty save for themselves.

Two immense facts strove in Barlow's mind and presently he spoke,
trying with the one to condone the other.

"Death goes before all," he said.  "Before death all doors are
opened.  Therefore my wife must pardon me for doing a thing she will
not easily understand.  It would be well if we pardoned oftener where
we don't understand, Jacob."

The other was staring from the window and hardly heard.

"What is that to me?  See you to that yourself," he answered.

The slow train seemed bent on torturing both men by its delay.  It
stopped to pick up a cattle-truck and a horse-box at Ivybridge.  It
dawdled again outside Plymouth.  Nearly an hour had passed before
they reached Millbay and took a cab.

"You must prepare for the worst, for I think she's gone," said
Barlow.  "I feel terrible certain that it is so, Jacob; and if that
has happened, I beg and pray you'll make no great upstore about it."

The younger shook his head.

"You cannot know she's gone.  We may be in time."

At the moment he spoke Margery, indeed, still lived, but was on the
brink of death and only drew faint and fitful breaths.  Her mother
sat by her and held her hand.  She did not know if any measure of
consciousness remained, but spoke without ceasing in a flood of texts
and exhortations.  She was very white and drawn.  She stopped
presently and put down her head to listen; but still the woman's
breast flickered, though the breath could not be heard.

"You'll soon be with the Lamb; you'll soon be with the Lamb.  You'll
soon wear your heavenly crown, my pretty," Judith kept saying.  She
longed for the end, but felt no fear now.  Then, upon her security,
came the sound of wheels over the cobbled street.  They stopped at
the door and, instantly alert, fearing harm, she hastened to the
window and saw, first Jacob, then her husband, alight.  Jacob pushed
straight into the house, but Barlow stopped a moment to pay the
cabman.

Mrs. Huxam rushed to the door and screamed to her brother who was
below.

"Lawrence, quick for God's sake!  Stop him--hit him down if he won't
stop!"

Then she returned to the sick-room and locked the door of it.

"Death--death come to her!  God take her home, God take her home!"
she implored on her knees by the bed; and now her ears were first
strained for voices below and then brought back to her child.  Others
might have supposed that Margery was beyond reach of any danger; but
not so Mrs. Huxam.  With Jacob's arrival an awful dread came upon her
and a fury of fear.  For who could tell what spark of consciousness
remained to receive the contagion of her husband's speech?  Noisy
voices were raised below.  Then her husband spoke swiftly and
silenced the others.  She heard him coming upstairs, while her
brother and Jacob followed.  If they defied her they might easily
break the door down, for the devil was most surely with them.  Her
mind worked furiously, broken free of reason, stung to passion and
fierce hatred of the evil forces now creeping upon her child's soul.
Margery lay as good as dead.  Each senseless breath was delayed
longer than the last; while salvation's gate stood open, with her
Saviour standing at the portal.

Lawrence Pulleyblank spoke from the other side of the door.

"Barlow and the man.  'Tis well and in reason they should come,
Judith.  They've made me see that.  It's God's wish he should----"

The devil was now in her brother's heart also; and he must have
captured her husband's, otherwise Barlow would not be there.  Judith
saw the trail of the Enemy step by step--Auna's broken promise, Jacob
deluding Huxam, winning him and now at the door, in this supreme
moment, to catch his prey--a masterpiece of craft and cunning.

"Open for God's love, Mrs. Huxam," implored Bullstone.

"Open, Judy--'tis all ordained that he should see her once more,"
entreated Barlow.  But she neither opened nor answered.  She prayed
for time.  She bent close to Margery and believed her dead.  She made
herself believe it.  Her hand trembled over the woman's mouth.  She
rested it there a moment.  Then came another faint suspiration.  What
was one worthless breath, more or less, against eternity?  She took
her hand off again and listened.

Now Lawrence Pulleyblank sternly bade his sister open the door; but
still she refused, answering nothing.  Then she heard that they were
breaking it down.

She went back quickly to the bed, while blows fell slowly from some
heavy object with which the men were battering.

In two minutes the door crashed open, and Jacob, followed by the
others, entered.

They saw Mrs. Huxam standing before them with a great light blazing
in her eyes and her features distorted.  She appeared to be insane.

"To God be the praise!  To God be the praise!  To God be the praise!"
she shrieked.  Then she flung up her arms; the flame went out of her
countenance and she fell forward and fainted.

Where the bed stood, a sheet had been drawn up over Margery's face.
Jacob approached and turned it down.  Then he knelt and bent close to
her.  Warmth rose from his wife; her open eyes were still lustrous
and reflected his in their unwavering mirrors; but she breathed no
more.  He kissed the grey shadow of the lips he had known so red,
gazed steadily upon her, pressed the hands crossed on her breast,
then rose and went away quietly, for he knew that she was dead.




BOOK III



CHAPTER I

'MOTHER'S STONE'

Adam Winter and William Marydrew were walking home side by side from
the funeral of Margery Bullstone.  Both wore black broadcloth and
soft, black felt hats, but there was a touch of colour about the
elder, for a red wool muffler wrapped his throat.  Billy stopped
after climbing the steep hill from Lydia Bridge to the hamlet above;
then he drew a little bone box from his pocket and took snuff.

"The man held in all right; but it's the calm before the storm for
certain," said William.  "He's raging a good bit.  They didn't ought
to have hid her dying state from him, or kept 'em apart after they
knew she wanted to come home."

"They did not," answered Winter, "and yet my aunt, who knows Mrs.
Huxam very well, tells me it was done for high religious reasons,
William."

"She hadn't been dead a minute, poor woman, afore Jacob smashed in
the door of the room; but he had this consolation from Lawrence
Pulleyblank, that his wife had been unconscious for hours and
couldn't have known him, even if he'd come in time to see her alive."